
Creating and implementing vision statements presents challenges to organizations. They can be challenging to write because they must balance being forward-looking and describing an ideal state without becoming so idealistic that the vision is unattainable. Vision statements can be an employee dissatisfier when staff feel the company's vision is filled with business buzzwords unrelated to the company's services or when the vision does not match day-to-day company policy; for example, a vision statement that includes root cause problem solving while managers are rewarded for fixing problems quickly rather than resolving systemic issues.[2] A vision statement may need to be paired with company initiatives to communicate and reinforce the vision, ensure processes align with the vision, and empower and incentivize employees to take actions that support the company vision
A just world without poverty
A computer on every desk and in every home
also available as a printed book 

see title verso for ISBN details 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY 
OF THE ARABIAN GULF 



THE EXPERIENCE OF ARCHAEOLOGY 

Series editor: Andrew Wheatcroft 
University of Stirling 



Rome and its Empire 
Stephen Johnson 

The Near East: Archaeology in the 'Cradle of Civilization' 
Charles Keith Maisels 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF 
THE ARABIAN GULF 

c. 5000-323 BC 



Michael Rice 



I 



London and New York 



First published in 1994 

by Routledge 

11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE 

This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2002. 

Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada 

by Routledge Inc. 

29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001 

© 1994 Michael Rice 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or 

reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, 

or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including 

photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval 

system, without permission in writing from the publishers. 

British Libraiy Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue for this book is available from the British Libraiy 

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 

Rice, Michael 

The archaeology of the Arabian Gulf/Michael Rice 

p. cm. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

1. Persian Gulf Region — Antiquities. 2. Persian Gulf Region — 

Civilization. I. Title. 

DS211.R531994 

953.6-dc20 93-7006 

ISBN 0-415-032687 (Print Edition) 
ISBN 0-203-03726-X Master e-book ISBN 
ISBN 0-203-20068-3 (Glassbook Format) 



CONTENTS 



List of Illustrations vii 

Introduction xi 

Preface xv 

Acknowledgements xvii 

1 THE ARABIAN GULF IN ANTIQUITY 1 

2 THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 24 

3 CLIMATE, SEA-LEVELS, MAN AND HIS COMPANIONS 63 

4 DILMUN, THE ANCIENT CULTURE OF THE GULF 78 

5 THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 99 

6 THE MYTHS OF SUMER AND DILMUN 127 

7 BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 141 

8 DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 203 

9 THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 264 

10 GILGAMESH, THE GULF AND THE LAND OF 

THE LIVING 300 

11 THE ENIGMA OF DILMUN 321 
The Chronology of the Arabian Gulf 327 
Abbreviations 333 
Notes 334 
Bibliography 348 
Index 358 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 



Endpaper map The Arabian Gulf in Antiquity 

Map 1 The Arabian Gulf, Mesopotamia, Elam, the Indus Valley, 

showing the principal archaeological sites mentioned in the 

text. 15 

2.1 The burial mounds, as sketched by Durand. 33 

2.2 An elevation and section of a mound opened by Durand. 37 

2.3 The burial mounds, photographed by Prideaux 

(from The Archaeological Survey of 'India, 1908-9). 47 

2.4 Prideaux's map of the Aali grave mounds — the 'Royal 

Tombs' (from The Archaeological Survey of 'India, 1908-9). 48 

3.1 Pleistocene fluctuations in temperature 

(from the Hofuf Museum, Saudi Arabia). 68 

3.2 A reconstruction of conditions in eastern Arabia in 
Miocene times showing the principal species then extant 

(from the Hofuf Museum, Saudi Arabia). 70 

3.3 Arid and relatively moist phases in Arabia during the last 

6,500 years (from the Hofuf Museum, Saudi Arabia). 71 

3.4 (a) Sea-levels in the Arabian Gulf from c. 14,000 BC to 

c. 6000 BC (from Nutzel 1976). 74 

(b) Bathymetric profile of the Gulf. 74 

7.1 (a) The 'Durand inscription' written in the cuneiform script 

in general use in the eighteenth century BC; 7.1(b) (p. 
147) shows the epigraphic form, for the word 'Dilmun'. 142 
Map 2 Principal archaeological sites in Bahrain and adjacent islands. 146 

7.2 A plan of the principal temple site at Barbar. The three 

temples date from c. 2100 BC to c.1700 BC (from Rice 1983). 157 

7.3 (a), (b), (c) Plans of Temples I, II and III. 158-9 



vu 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

7.4 An isometric drawing of the Barbar temple construction 
(drawing D.B.Doe). 160 

7.5 The sacred well or 'Apsu' at the Barbar temple complex 
(author). 162 

7.6 The platform on which the second temple at Barbar stood 
(Department of Antiquities, Bahrain). 162 

7.7 A group of the characteristic seals from Bahrain at the 
beginning of the second millennium, recovered from the 

sacred well at Barbar (Department of Antiquities, Bahrain). 164 

7.8 A pottery sherd bearing the impression of a Dilmun seal 
(Bahrain National Museum). 165 

7.9 A Dilmun seal (from Failaka island) which shows a bull- 
headed lyre and an enigmatic scene which may be of the 
sacrifice of a second bull. 166 

7.10 A small, evidently sacred building at Diraz East, notable 
for the large columns which presumably supported some 
substantial upper storey (author). 174 

7.11 The occupant of a grave of Umm an-Nar type at Medinet 
Hamed; third millennium BC (author). 177 

7.12 The 'Royal Tombs' at Aali. 180 

7.13 Three fine goblets, assembled from fragments recovered 
from a grave mound at Aali, late third millennium BC 

(Bahrain National Museum). 181 

7.14 A copper goblet from a grave at Aali (Bahrain National 
Museum). 183 

7.15 Burials were densely congregated at Sar. 184 

7.16 The area at Sar, excavated by the London-Bahrain 

expedition (plan by the London-Bahrain Expedition). 185 

7.17 The site of Sar, early second millennium BC. The temple is 
in the centre of the complex in the foreground (London- 
Bahrain Expedition). 186 

7.18 The temple at Sar (author). 187 

7.19 The temple site after excavation by the London-Bahrain 
Expedition. 189 

7.20 A Dilmun seal from Sar, of an unparalleled and very 

striking design (London-Bahrain Expedition). 190 

7.21 A Dilmun seal from Sar. 190 

7.22 A Dilmun seal from Sar. 191 

7.23 Sealings recovered from the houses at Sar (London-Bahrain 
Expedition). 191 

7.24 A fine chlorite circular vessel with a temple-facade design 
(Bahrain National Museum). 192 

7.25 Baskets coated in bitumen from Sar (Bahrain National 
Museum). 192 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

7.26 Chlorite vessels from graves at Sar (Bahrain National Museum). 194 

7.27 A terracotta horseman from a grave at Sar, from the 

Hellenistic period (Bahrain National Museum). 194 

7.28 The burials at Al-Hajjar (Bahrain National Museum). 195 

7.29 A dog was buried in one of the Al-Hajjar tombs 

(Department of Antiquities, Bahrain). 197 

7.30 Al-Hajjar was the first site in Bahrain to produce a Dilmun 
seal buried with its owner (Department of Antiquities, 
Bahrain). 198 

7.31 A stamp seal of the Jemdet Nasr period, c. 3000 BC, 
originating in Sumer, recovered from one of the Al-Hajjar 

graves (Bahrain National Museum. 199 

8.1 Failaka, an important settlement in Hellenistic times 

(author). 208 

8.2 (a) Two of the many stamp seals recovered from Failaka. 210 
(b) A group of seals from Failaka island; early second 

millennium BC. 211 

8.3 A reconstruction of an Ubaid period settlement on the 

eastern Arabian coast c. 3800 BC (Hofuf Museum). 218 

8.4 A fine limestone statue, with affinities to the Early 
Dynastic II style in Sumer, c. 2700 BC (Museum of 
Archaeology and Ethnography, Riyadh). 220 

8.5 Fragments of richly decorated chlorite vessels and 
containers, from Eastern Arabia (Museum of Archaeology 

and Ethnography, Riyadh). 222 

8.6 A small lapis lazuli figurine, of an old man wrapped in a 

cloak (Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography, Riyadh). 223 

8.7 Seals from tombs excavated at Dhahran (Department of 
Antiquities and Museums, Riyadh). 225 

8.8 Muscovite schist, also known as 'sunstone' (Museum of 
Archaeology and Ethnography, Riyadh). 225 

Map 3 Archaeological sites in the Qatar peninsula. 229 

8.9 The circular decorated tomb at Hili, Abu Dhabi, as 

restored, third millennium BC (Shirley Kay). 242 

8.10 A man riding a donkey and an embracing couple; 

the Hili tomb. 244 

8.11 Two felines tearing a smaller animal; the Hili tomb. 244 

8.12 Two oryx in confrontation, with two figures between and 
beneath them, holding hands; the Hili tomb. 245 

8.13 A chlorite beaker from Wadi Asimah, third millennium BC 
(Shirley Kay). 247 

8.14 A communal tomb at Qattara, showing its entrance and reused 
Umm an-Nar stonework, second millennium BC (Shirley Kay). 247 

ix 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

8.15 An excavated tomb at Shimal, Ras Al-Khaima, second 
millennium BC (Shirley Kay). 248 

Map 4 Archaeological sites in the United Arab Emirates and the 

northern part of the Sultanate of Oman. 249 

8.16 Ancient copper workings in the wadis of northern Oman 
(Roger Wood). 251 

8.17 The round fortified tower at Nizwa before the modern 
development of the town. 253 

8.18 Omani tombs of the mid to late third millennium BC 

(Roger Wood). 255 

8.19 Three typical cairns on an escarpment in northern Oman, 

built from local flint. 256 

8.20 Finely built Umm an-Nar tomb excavated at Bat, near Ibri, 

third millennium BC. 257 

8.21 Rock carving in Oman. 260 

8.22 The enigmatic carvings on the face of 'Colman's Rock' 

(Dr Paolo Costa). 26 1 

Map 5 Trade routes in Western Asia, in the third and second 

millennia. 267 

9.1 The ibex, often depicted with its head turned back, 

frequently included in the iconography of the Gulf seals. 287 

9.2 A Dilmun seal showing scorpions circling a maze-like 

design of enclosed squares. 287 

93 Linked protomes of ibex heads, whirling in a design of 

great antiquity. 287 

9.4 A seal which recalls Enki's penetration of a succession of 
goddesses. 289 

9.5 A seal showing two warriors in confrontation, holding a 

shield or buckler between them. 289 

9.6 A figure standing (or lying) within what may be a grave, 

with two vessels built into the walls. 291 

9.7 An impression showing two figures gesticulating under a 
palm-tree. 291 

9.8 One of the finest and most monumental seals recovered 

from Bahrain. 294 
9-9 A design of striking modernity, recalling Matisse, of three 

figures in a boat. 294 

9.10 Two lahmu depicted on a seal banded in gold. 294 



INTRODUCTION 



This book is the product of many years' involvement in the affairs of the 
Arabian peninsula and Gulf states with whose past it is concerned, 
particularly with the state of Bahrain, which lies at the centre of the 
Gulf, as much historically as geographically. My involvement has swung, 
on the one hand, between a concern with the contemporary politics of 
the region and, in particular, with some of the issues which have arisen 
from the dependence of so much of the western world on its oil reserves 
and, on the other, with the uncovering of its extraordinary antiquity. It 
is perhaps difficult to imagine two such extreme perspectives, but 
straddling them has given me considerable happiness and only occasional 
discomfort. I have learned much about the people of the region, who 
have become my friends, and I believe I have gained some understanding 
of the role which eastern Arabia and the Gulf played in the development 
of many of the beliefs which are common to those of us who draw our 
cultural inheritance from the lands which lie to the west of the Zagros 
mountains. 

The archaeology of the Arabian peninsula is very largely a new discipline. 
I have been singularly fortunate in having been involved with it over the 
period of its greatest activity, in the past thirty years or so. My interest in the 
archaeology of the ancient world long preceded my first visit to the Gulf, 
back in the early 1960s. When I came to Bahrain, I became aware of the 
remarkable work of the Danish Expeditions, promoted by the Forhistorisk 
Museum at Moesgard, an idyllic place near Aarhus in Jutland. The Danes had 
already been working in and around Bahrain for some years when I arrived. 
In common with the excavators I was alarmed at the risks to which a lack of 
understanding of the importance of Bahrain's antiquities exposed the sites 
and the increasing quantity of artefacts which was being excavated from 
them. I urged my friends in the Government of Bahrain (even then a 
particularly enlightened one) to cause a museum to be built, both to house 
the products of the excavations and to set them, and the archaeology of 
Bahrain itself, into some sort of coherent context, one that I, for example, 
might understand. 

xi 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Eventually, and somewhat to my surprise, the Government asked my 
colleagues and me, who had some modest experience of design and 
communications, to prepare the museum. This we did working closely with 
Geoffrey Bibby, of the Danish Expedition; his book, Looking for Dilmun, 
tells of the work of the expeditions in Bahrain and in other of the Gulf states. 
The museum was housed initially in the Government's own headquarters 
building, later to be moved to what had been the RAF Officers' Mess at 
Muharraq, Bahrain's sister island. It was well received. We were able to work 
with a free hand and to introduce ideas then only beginning to be employed 
in contemporary museum design. 

My colleagues and I have been deeply immersed in Arabia's past since 
that time and in communicating it to the present day, as a result of this well- 
omened Bahraini precedent. Over the intervening years we have designed 
and installed museums in Qatar, Oman and Saudi Arabia. We have also been 
concerned with the making of films on the region's past and in two other 
particularly satisfying activities. These have been the launching and editorial 
preparation of two important academic journals concerned with Arabia's 
archaeology, 1 and helping in the creation, staffing or development of 
Departments of Antiquities for several of the states. The direction of the 
Departments is now the responsibility of people from the states themselves; 
the journals too, increasingly, are being locally edited and produced and this 
is entirely as it should be. 

In the course of planning the various museums for which we have been 
responsible, we are naturally much concerned with the research which must 
underlie any well-conceived museum exhibition. In some cases we carry 
out the research ourselves, or at least direct it; in others we work closely with 
the ever-increasing number of specialist scholars in the peninsula states, in 
Britain, Europe and the United States, who are now engaged on studies 
relating to the past of Arabia and the Gulf. 

One of the compensations of working in museums in Arabia and the Gulf 
is that the people who use them are prepared to read far longer explanatory 
texts than would many western audiences. To people who are as involved 
with communications as my colleagues and I, this is highly satisfactory. It is 
also the reason for a great deal of the basic material of this book being 
readily accessible, not least to me. 

I was also responsible for the planning, organization and publication of a 
major archaeological and historical conference which was held in Bahrain in 
December 1983- The published Proceedings of the conference 2 will provide 
the basis for a great deal of new research for many years to come: the findings 
of several of the distinguished scholars who took part will be a revelation to 
many. These papers and the several books which have been published in 
recent years have been of great help to me in preparing this text. I have also 
been assisted immeasurably by the work which we have collectively 
undertaken in preparing the six local museums with which the Department 

xii 



INTRODUCTION 

of Antiquities and Museum of Saudi Arabia entrusted us; this project is further 
described in Chapter 2. I am particularly grateful to my colleagues, Derek 
Dalby, my partner for many years, and Will Facey, who was responsible for 
the co-ordination of much of the research which has gone into making the 
museums the well-rounded institutions which I believe they are. 

I am conscious that, despite my own considerable commitment to the 
region and its archaeology, it is very largely the findings of other men that I 
am presenting here. It used to be said that there were two sorts of 
archaeologists, 'diggers' and 'classifiers'. I suppose I might scrape into the 
latter category, but I would rather plead for a third to be accepted, that of the 
'presenters', and I will contentedly take a modest place amongst them. In 
archaeology the presenters are those who communicate the lives of those 
who lived long ago to those who live today. 

I acknowledge most gratefully a debt to those scholars whose work forms 
the substance of this book. Such facts as there are, are theirs; much of the 
interpretation is mine and I have attempted to make it clear where this is the 
case. The errors and omissions are wholly my own. 

Michael Rice 



PREFACE 



The invasion of Kuwait by Iraq in August 1990 served to remind us how vital 
the Gulf and eastern Arabia have become to the prosperity of much of the 
world. This concern was signalled by the unprecedented ferocity of the Allies' 
response to Iraq's annexation of Kuwait; if some saw the Allied response as 
demonstrating a double standard when dealing with the politics of a part of 
the world which has suffered more than most from the intervention of foreign 
interests, it was generally respected as the necessary reaction to the absorption 
of a small, independent state by a larger, more aggressive neighbour. Most 
right-thinking people, in consequence, applauded the effect of the Allied 
effort if they did not always admire its methods of operation or the morality 
which seemed sometimes to be underlying it. 

The attack on Kuwait also revealed how very little was known about the 
past of a part of the world which suddenly became the almost totally 
absorbing focus of international media attention. Given the fact that for 
more than half a century much of the industrial world has been powered 
by fossil hydrocarbon extracted from this very region, such a lack of 
awareness of its rich history was surprising and not a little deplorable, the 
more so when its unique contribution to the history of our species is 
apprehended. 

One of the ironies of the war in the Gulf was the discovery by many 
that the Gulf states represent a much more coherent historical entity than 
does much of the land between the Twin Rivers, which is today called 
Iraq. The heritage which the world still enjoys from the successive 
civilizations of Mesopotamia is immense. However, whereas the Gulf 
culture, known to history as Dilmun and the principal subject of this 
book, survived as a distinct entity from its first appearance in eastern 
Arabia at the end of the fourth millennium BC down to Islamic times and 
to the present day through the modern states which are its successors, 
the land of Mesopotamia was ever fractious and was rarely brought under 
the control of one power centre. The city state, often bounded by a few 
hundred acres, was the characteristic Sumerian political unit: the Akkadian 
'empire' lasted for a century or so, and the Babylonians and Assyrians 

xv 



PREFACE 

came and went almost as swiftly, despite the powerful, often brutal impact 
which they made on the history of the Near East. 

It is perhaps facile to search for historical parallels over long periods of 
human history but the northern headlands of the Gulf have been a disputed 
area for at least four thousand years, though not, again ironically, the region 
which today is represented by the State of Kuwait: that was, from around 
2000 BC, part of Dilmun and hence ineluctably part of the Gulf. The Shatt al 
Arab however, to the east, marking the frontier between Iraq and Iran, was 
the cause of the final destruction of the benign civilization of Sumer when 
the king of Elam, in Iran, took captive Ibbi-Sin, the king of Ur, of the last 
native Sumerian dynasty around the year 2006 BC. 

But the quarrels of Mesopotamians and Iranians are not the true measure 
of the importance of the Gulf in human history. Rather its contributions to 
the widening of man's perceptions of the world around him should be 
recognized in the vitality of myth, the enthusiasm of the quest, the challenge 
and invention of commerce, in art and literature and in the mystery of the 
origins of the way of life in which our species has elected to live. 

A great deal has happened in the archaeology of the Gulf over the past 
decade or so since first I began to publish it. It is now possible to speak of 
the Gulf in antiquity as one coherent region and to extend the story of its 
people over the entire range of recorded history and beyond. It is this story 
which this book attempts to tell. 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 



The author gratefully acknowledges the following: the Department of 
Antiquities and Museums, the State of Bahrain; the Department of Antiquities 
and Museums, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia; the Department of Antiquities 
and Museums, the State of Kuwait; the Department of Antiquities and 
Museums, the United Arab Empires, the Department of Antiquities and 
Museums, Sultanate of Oman, the State of Qatar; Bahrain National Museum; 
the CNRS; the Forhistorisk Museum, Moesgard; the Louvre Museum; the 
Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography, Riyadh; the Royal Asiatic Society; 
the Trustees of the British Museum; the University of Chicago Press; Indiana 
University Press; Princeton University Press; E. Benn Ltd; E.J. Brill; Faber & 
Faber Ltd; Penguin Books Ltd; Thames & Hudson Ltd; the Illustrated London 
News; The Directors, The London-Bahrain Expedition; Dr D.B.Doe; Mrs Shirley 
Kay; Dr Paolo Costa and, in particular, my colleague Ian Cook of Graphic 
Design International for the maps. 



xvii 



THE ARABIAN GULF IN 
ANTIQUITY 



Four thousand years ago a man walked barefoot across the newly plastered 
floor of a curious building on a small island, close to the placid waters of an 
enclosed and distant sea. 1 What manner of man he was we have no way of 
knowing, except, a little absurdly, that his feet were remarkably large; we 
know, too, that he was not alone, for he was one of several to walk over the 
plaster laid down on the floor, and that one of his companions was a dog. 
Whether he was a labourer engaged on the construction of the building 
(though surely a singularly careless one), or a stranger who did not know of 
the work which was in progress so close to the whispering sea and, perhaps 
at night and in the darkness, stumbled across the still damp surface, are now 
beyond speculation. 

In this remote episode it is the location, and not the walker by the shore, 
which is important; the building was a sacred place, part of a complex of 
monumental buildings raised to the glory of gods who, at the time when the 
careless (or perhaps deliberate) feet crossed the plaster floor, had already 
been worshipped there for upwards of 500 years in handsome stone-built 
temples and, in less substantial structures, perhaps for longer still. From the 
middle years of the third millennium BC a temple had stood upon this site, 
skirted by palm-trees and lapped by the nearby, shallow sea. Here men had 
sought both to honour and to propitiate the forces of nature and the unknown 
which they eternalized as gods. It is possible only to guess at the name of the 
principal divinity who was commemorated in this ancient place; but everything 
that now is known about it leads to the conviction that he was a great god, 
the lord and protector of a people for long totally forgotten, without whose 
lives the world would not be quite as it is today. 

The temples on this distant island stand at a special point in time and 
space: from the earliest of them to the latest they span one of those periods 
in human history when the most intense social, technological and cultural 
changes were set in train. It will perhaps surprise some to be told that the 
island and its temples lie close to the origins of the modern world; the search 
for their own origins was a preoccupation of the people most closely identified 
with the mysteries enshrined in the temples. 2 That search itself forms part of 
the substance of this study. 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

The island itself is both the geographical centre as well as the focus of 
much legend and of elaborate religious cults. Its oecumene, if that is not too 
pretentious a word for so modest a land, stretched far to the north, deep into 
Iraq, and southwards out into the Indian Ocean beyond the horizons of the 
Arabian peninsula, of which it is a geographical dependency. 

The island lies in the shallow waters of the Arabian (sometimes called the 
Persian) Gulf: today it is called Bahrain. In ancient times it was variously 
named: Dilmun, Tilmun, Tylos, Awad, Samak, Awal, 3 but whatever its name, 
it was the epicentre of a region which was to exercise a profound influence 
on the history of the western world. That region was bounded by the 
marshlands of southern Iraq to the north and, to the south, by the mountains 
of Oman; between these points on the western littoral of the Arabian peninsula 
lies the scatter of little shaikhdoms which make up the states of the Gulf. To 
the east is Iran. 

Only in the very recent past has the rest of the world been reminded even 
of the existence of this small part of it and then not for reasons of its high 
antiquity nor for any contribution which it may have made to an understanding 
of some of the most deep-seated preoccupations of mankind. For its people, 
entire millennia passed in neglect and forgetfulness. Fifty years ago or less 
the Arabian shores of the Gulf supported some of the least endowed of the 
world's populations, living in tiny settlements on the edge of the harsh and 
inhospitable desert. 4 With infinite toil and in the face of an often merciless 
climate, its people wrested a bare subsistence from the sea and the lean 
herds of goat and camel which the land could barely nourish. But in modern 
times the kaleidoscope of human fortune has shattered and reformed totally; 
today the people of the Gulf enjoy per capita incomes which are amongst 
the highest in the world and a level of prosperity and social welfare which 
makes them the object of the often malicious envy of those who have been 
less favoured by the caprice of fate. 

It was, of course, oil which effected this phenomenal transformation, from 
abject poverty to wealth limited only by the extent of the black lakes on 
which much of south-western Asia floats. With the accession of such great 
riches came the interplay of politics and the complex games of more powerful 
nations which quickly saw the control of the Gulf lands as a prize worth any 
amount of conflict and chicanery. 

Half a century of external influence has marked the region's most recent 
history, an influence not always entirely maleficent. But, curiously, in all that 
time and with the hordes of western officials, engineers, buccaneers, 
businessmen and their attendant flocks of journalists, academics and all 
manner of miscellaneous commentators who followed in their train, few 
people ever gave thought to what had preceded the Gulf's sudden plunge 
into the twentieth century. 

To their credit, however, some few did. Archaeological excavation of a 
sort had been carried out, with varying degrees of intensity, efficiency and 



THE ARABIAN GULF IN ANTIQUITY 

perception, for over a century, notably in Bahrain. 5 The work of more recent 
years and the improved techniques of excavation and analysis now available 
to the archaeologist's hand are beginning, if still only dimly, to suggest the 
profoundly important role which this region played in the early centuries of 
the development of urban cultures and in their diffusion over formidable 
distances. 

As with so many other disciplines, in the past twenty years archaeology 
has witnessed the recasting of many of its most fervently defended concepts 
of earlier times. Archaeology is concerned with the extraction and evaluation 
of those material evidences of the past which can either be recovered or 
reconstructed. More scientific methodology, a greater awareness among many 
of the nations, the successors of the ancient cultures, of the significance of 
their heritage, and the sophisticated processing and publication of the results 
of an ever-increasing number of excavations throughout the world, have 
contributed to the transformation of what modern man believes he knows 
about his predecessors and hence about his own origins. At the same time 
there has been, amongst all types and conditions of humanity, an 
immeasurably increased awareness of and concern for the origins of these 
societies which have been constructed, in the course of an uncertain progress 
from a brute nature to the prospect, diminishing though it must seem to be in 
our own time, of enlightenment. Ironically, two of the less elevating accessories 
of our contemporary culture, television and tourism, have done much to 
make the public at large aware of antiquity. 

The Near East, despite increasing competition from other areas, is still the 
most profitable region for the study of man's past. But the inevitable 
shortcomings of the reliance by archaeology on the evidence which is actually 
available is nowhere more tellingly demonstrated than in the case of Arabia's 
position in scholarship. Until very recently few works of general archaeological 
or historical reference contained any mention of the Gulf in their indices, or 
indeed of Arabia in pre-Islamic times at all, except perhaps for the trade in 
aromatics. This was usually mentioned incidentally, with perhaps a passing 
reference to the southern Arabian kingdoms which grew out of its prosperity. 
But beyond these glances, virtually nothing. 

Thus Henri Frankfort, one of the most perceptive of the archaeologists of 
this century, could write in the preface to The Birth of Civilisation in the 
Ancient Near East: 'I have confined myself to Egypt and Mesopotamia, the 
cultural centres of the Ancient Near East; for in the peripheral regions 
civilisation arose late and was always, to some extent, derivative.' 6 

In this case Frankfort was, to a degree, misguided. He was, however, 
hardly likely to think otherwise for, in his day, the evidence was scarcely 
available for a more enlightened or informed view to prevail, though some 
scholars did perceive, however dimly, that Arabia and its littorals represented 
a blank page in man's history which demanded to be filled. Since his study 
was written, of course, other regions such as Anatolia, the Levant, even the 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

far west of Europe, have come to be revalued and their contribution to the 
development of that confusing concept, civilization, accepted as far greater 
than Frankfort could ever have realized. 

It might be imagined that it would be difficult to overlook the Arabian 
peninsula, the 'Island of the Arabs', that great land mass which divides 
Africa from Asia and which in surface area is approximately the size of 
western Europe. Yet historians and archaeologists had largely succeeded 
in doing this, from late Roman times to the very recent past. Such neglect 
is careless, to say the least, the more so because by no stretch of even the 
most perverse imagination could Arabia ever really have been said to be 
terra incognita. For over 1,400 years now it has been the focus of one of 
the most pervasive and powerful of the world's faiths, whose adherents 
are enjoined to travel to the Arabian holy places at least once in their 
lifetimes. This fact alone has meant the accumulation of a gigantic traffic 
of humanity and of experience over the centuries; that traffic's existence 
at least has been well known to Europeans since Crusader times, if not 
before. 7 

Nor has Arabia experienced any lack of spirited, if variously motivated, 
foreigners who have sought to penetrate the peninsula's interior wastelands 
of sand and wind-scoured rock. From them has descended the enduring 
myth of the dauntless, fierce but noble-hearted tent dwellers, customarily 
but inaccurately called the 'Bedouin'. The desert was furrowed with the 
tracks of all manners and conditions of purposeful explorers, seeking who 
knows what enchantment or release in the harsh purity of Arabia's empty 
spaces. 

But, for whatever reason, few of Arabia's explorers were even of a modest 
archaeological bent. Admittedly the pickings were sparse when compared 
with Egypt, the Levant or Mesopotamia; politics, too, largely ignored Arabia 
in the nineteenth century, the high point of Near Eastern exploration and 
western exploitation, leaving the peninsula generally, with the exception 
of its western littoral and the south which controlled the route to India, to 
slumber under the formidable power of the Ottoman Empire. Egypt had 
been opened to the West and to the pursuits of scholars, first by Napoleon's 
expedition (Tour thousand years look down on you, Soldiers') and then 
by Mohammad Ali's Europeanizing policies. Mesopotamia attracted an early 
interest and her sites were being dug, however inexpertly, early in the 
nineteenth century. But, as was most markedly the case in the Levant and 
the Syro-Palestinian desert, one of the primary motivations for archaeological 
activity in the Land of the Two Rivers was to prove the historicity of the 
Bible. 

The Biblical orientation of much European archaeology survived well 
into the twentieth century; the Bible was still considered a primary, if 
somewhat selective, source of an understanding of the ways of the ancient 
world, before the Redemption. All over the lands of the ancient Near East 



THE ARABIAN GULF IN ANTIQUITY 

there continued to plod, sometimes in extreme discomfort but always in 
confident certainty, an army of learned men. They were often clergymen 
who espoused passionately the claims of this or that small piece of desert 
or river bank as the site of such and such a recorded intervention of the 
Divine in the affairs of man. That the topography usually did not fit, at least 
according to the Bible's directions, did not deter them at all. 

Sadly, the winds of time have, as often as not, blown away the theories 
that they laboured so hard to construct. But Arabia shared rarely in these 
Biblical excursions, mostly, perhaps, because, other than in certain 
instances, Arabian sites do not feature largely in the Biblical record, and 
even taking into account the often over-excited terms which seem to 
have determined the character of much Biblical archaeology, there were 
few scholars who would readily venture into such unpromising territory. 
Then, of course, there was the uncomfortable fact that Arabia was firmly 
held, as it were, by the competition, which, despite all the efforts of the 
missionary societies of the day, had shown a marked and peremptory 
disinclination to accept the precepts of Christian proselytizers and firmly 
resisted any attempt by infidels to involve themselves with the exclusive 
land of Arabia. From this land, in its inhabitants' view, had sprung the last 
and greatest of the Prophets and the ultimate Revelation of God's purpose 
to man. Ideological constraints, too, militated against the unearthing of 
the material evidences of 'the Age of Ignorance', which to the devout 
Muslim was represented by the whole course of human history prior to 
AD 622. Deep revulsion was also expressed at the actions of those who 
disturbed the tombs of the dead, even if they were not, in strict terms, the 
burials of believers. 

Then, of course, there was the simple but compelling fact of Arabia's extreme 
physical discomfort. Whilst this did not actually discourage all interested scholars, 
it may be that the pleasures of excavation in the Nile Valley or by the shores of 
the sun-blessed Aegean were discernibly greater than those attending similar 
work in Arabia. There were also the discommoding facts of the sheer immensity 
of the desert and the lack of enthusiasm towards foreigners looking for gold 
(for the search for gold is a fact well known to every desert-dweller about 
every archaeologist) which was demonstrated, sometimes fatally for the would- 
be searchers, by its people. 

Arabian archaeology is in fact essentially a twentieth-century phenomenon; 
indeed, with one or two exceptions, it is to all intents and purposes a post- 
World War II development. It is one of the less immediately predictable by- 
products of the exploitation of the Arabian peninsula's staggering reserves 
of fossil hydrocarbons, the oil for which the industrial world so desperately 
thirsts. It is pertinent to this study that the reserves of Arabia's oil are located 
beneath the eastern province of Saudi Arabia and the states of the peninsula's 
eastern littoral which form the substance of this book. Commerce, in any 
serious, organized sense, began here, more than 4,000 years ago; it is the 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

pursuit of commercial gain which has brought the region back to the 
consciousness of the world. 

The unremitting pursuit of the one resource which is all that most of the 
oil-bearing lands possess has been, generally speaking, equivocal. The West 
has almost exhausted itself in devising machines and whole economies which 
depend upon this sole resource of a people whose consequent prosperity is 
not only dependent upon those very machines and economies, but is also 
often bitterly resented. Now, the political power deriving from the ownership 
of so much of the world's energy resources has given the states of the Arabian 
peninsula a disconcerting influence on the lives of a substantial portion of 
the people who live on this planet. It is perhaps as well to try to understand 
something of their history. In doing so, we will find that we are discovering 
much about our own. 

Thus far we have spoken of Arabia and the Arabian peninsula. Now we 
must become a little more specific, narrowing the focus down to one particular 
part of the peninsula with which this study will be concerned. This region is 
that which contains, in contemporary geopolitical terms, Kuwait, the Eastern 
Province of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the State of Qatar, the archipelago 
of islands which comprise the State of Bahrain, the seven shaikhdoms of the 
United Arab Emirates and the Sultanate of Oman. Collectively this region is 
described as 'eastern Arabia'; it is also the western littoral of that inland sea, 
the gulf which divides Arabia from Iran and which, by reason of the 
controversy which attends whichever territorial adjective (Arabian or Persian) 
is employed to identify it, is most generally described simply as 'the Gulf. 
This results in the infinite confusion of those living in the Americas, to whom 
the term generally has meant the Gulf of Mexico. Perhaps the conflict in the 
Arabian Gulf following the invasion of Kuwait will have served to identify it, 
for all nations. 

This story is therefore concerned with the antiquity of eastern Arabia 
and of the Gulf. As such it is partial and limited, necessarily disregarding 
by far the largest part of the Arabian peninsula and concentrating only on 
one quadrant of it. There are three main reasons why this should be so. 

The first is that, compared with the rest of Arabia, the eastern quadrant 
has generally been far better researched, to the extent at least that it is 
possible to lay out, with reasonable assurance, a historical sequence for 
it based on the evidence brought to light by the combination of chance 
and archaeology. For the past fifty years or thereabouts, access for non- 
Muslims to eastern Arabia has also been much easier than to any other 
part of the peninsula. Because they are the oil-producing regions of Arabia, 
the states have all maintained a substantial and increasing degree of contact 
with the outside world, sustaining significant populations of foreigners, 
including Europeans and Americans. Second, the opportunities for a 
fulfilled social and cultural life have in the past been limited in these 
parts, often notably so. In consequence the foreigners living in eastern 



THE ARABIAN GULF IN ANTIQUITY 

Arabia have frequently turned to archaeology by way of diversion. The 
third factor provides the essence of this book: in eastern Arabia and the 
Gulf lies much of the earliest mythical and conceptual material which 
informs many of the most profoundly rooted beliefs of the modern world 
and of the iconography which illuminates them. 

In the early years the foreign, if originally largely amateur, preoccupation 
with archaeology led in time to an awareness by professional archaeologists 
that the region did contain important and hitherto largely overlooked material. 
Gradually professional teams began to work there, in several of the states 
freely and with official support and involvement. 

By geomorphological chance, a very substantial part of the world's reserves 
of fossil hydrocarbons, in oil-bearing strata laid down hundreds of millions 
of years ago, lies under these peninsula states. The earliest commercial 
exploitation of oil from the Arabian Gulf took place in 1932 when the first 
commercial quantities were exported from Bahrain: 8 in the light of what will 
be seen to be the almost mystical role which Bahrain has exercised in the 
region as a land of the beginning of things, this chance seems peculiarly 
appropriate. Since 1932 the region has become one of the most sought-after 
commercial and financial markets on the globe. It would nonetheless be an 
exaggeration to describe the Gulf states today as the very centre of the world's 
trade: it would not have been so great an exaggeration 4,000 years ago. 

Throughout much of the third millennium BC and into the early centuries 
of the second, the Gulf was part (arguably the most important part) of the 
principal highway for the movement of international trade. The route ran 
from western Anatolia, down the twin rivers of Mesopotamia, the Tigris and 
the Euphrates, through the Gulf to Pakistan and up the Indus Valley riverine 
system to huge, forbiddingly monumental cities such as Harappa and Moenjo- 
Daro. This route may also have touched or have been connected with others 
to even more distant regions; westwards the traders may have penetrated to 
the Nile Valley. 

Thus the Gulf played a major role in that extraordinary period, from c. 
3300 BC to c. 2200 BC, when a great surge of energy seems to have possessed 
the populations of the Nile and the Tigris-Euphrates valleys and the lands 
contiguous with them, in consequence of which many of what have 
subsequently come to be regarded as the distinguishing marks of civilization 
and culture were first laid down. Indeed, no comparable period of dynamic 
change has been experienced by our species until the present century. 

The organization of urban societies, the management and direction of 
large bodies of citizens, irrigation, the rapid advance of agriculture, the 
introduction of hierarchies, kingship, monumental architecture, writing 
(branching rapidly into administrative and literary usages), formalized rituals 
both religious and civil, the codification of laws, the specialization of crafts, 
the growth of defensive systems and military levies: indeed all the 
paraphernalia of developed societies which largely remained unchanged 

7 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

until our own day, either erupted into the world in this brief period of human 
history, or, during it, were refined out of recognition from their early forms. 
From this time everything was totally changed in the societies which 
experienced these phenomena and in those which have descended from 
them, including our own. From these Valley peoples, through a process of 
exceptional practical and intellectual energy, emerged the magnificent cultures 
of Pharaonic Egypt and of Sumer, the one arguably the most human, engaging 
and, paradoxically, the most majestic of ancient societies, the other the most 
inventive and dynamic. 9 

The discoveries of the post-war period have not diminished the splendour 
of the achievements of the two remarkable peoples who brought these cultures 
to birth; equally, they have revealed that, with regard to certain important 
aspects of what had seemed to be peculiarly their achievements, they were 
not, in fact, the first. Thus to the Sumerians is credited the origin of the curious 
human practice of building and living in cities; certainly the world had to wait 
for the emergence of the Sumerian city-states in the early third millennium for 
the particular form of city, in hierarchy, organization and structure, that modern 
man would recognize as something like his own. But thousands of years before 
even the earliest of Sumerian cities was raised up at Eridu, on a small island in 
the extreme south of the Mesopotamian marshlands, a 10-acre fortified 
settlement had been built at Jericho (c. 9000 BC) 10 far away to the west in 
Palestine. Great watch-towers guarded Jericho's walls against the incursion of 
the wild desert tribes who sought control of the wells which the people of 
Jericho had tapped and organized for their economy in the tenth millennium 
before the Christian era. Perhaps more remarkable still, 3,000 years before the 
first tentative temples began to be raised beside the god-infested Nile, painted 
shrines with the evidence of elaborate rites and worship were set up within 
the town (for it is difficult to use another word to describe it) that flourished on 
the Anatolian plains at Catal Huyiik, on a site more than three times larger than 
Jericho. 11 

Even in this remote and obscure period of man's development, at least 
7,000 years ago, sophisticated art, so much the most surprising of man's 
achievements, flourished. The carvings and paintings of these lonely Anatolian 
townsmen have a strange and chilling quality. Their principal divinity seems 
to have been a goddess, massive and fecund, who, with her boy-consort, is 
portrayed supported by leopards, her power manifest in bulls: somehow, 
terror never seems to be very far distant from her and the creatures that 
attend her. 12 A high bull-cult seems to have been one of the characteristic 
practices of Catal Huyiik, one which was to have a profound influence on 
cultures as far distant as the islands in the Gulf, Egypt and Crete in the Aegean. 
After a few centuries of richly productive life, the Anatolian settlements 
disappeared: a long night descended until a second dawn heralded the first 
appearance of those civilizations which were to set the pattern for all the 
ages which followed them. With the invention of writing, at its earliest in the 



THE ARABIAN GULF IN ANTIQUITY 

middle of the fourth millennium, history begins and with it the record of 
urban man. 

There was a time in man's experience when everything was new under 
the sun. To many people, educated conventionally, the ancient world meant 
a subjective and often sentimentalized picture of life in a Greece and a Rome 
that never were. Such a view was fostered by nineteenth-century 
educationalists, often to satisfy their own emotional needs and frequently to 
warrant the moral and political ethics of the Europe of their day: Winckelmann, 
as it were, hand in hand with Dr Arnold. Otherwise, and with only a passing 
nod to the Egyptians (who were considered odd and rather disturbing), the 
problems of the remoter reaches of human history could be readily resolved 
by the simple reliance on Biblical revelation. 

Myth, religious beliefs and fairy stories acknowledge no frontiers. 
Throughout human history most peoples have felt compelled irresistibly to 
seek a time when the world was young and free, when men and animals 
lived at one together, as in a world imagined by Savary. In this quest, so 
often identified with an imagined land of innocence and abundance, man 
proclaimed his protest against the debased, troubled and guilt-laden condition 
of his own humanity. Out of the need to explain his own existence came his 
hope that he was not entirely alone and that providence had some care of 
him. Thus man created, both as a means of consolation and because he was 
a highly creative animal much given to poetic expression, a series of splendid 
legends: in seeking for Eden, the primaeval garden of tranquillity and 
fulfilment, man revealed something of what, wistfully, he would have liked 
his world to be. 

With the revelation of the geological age of the world, even the most 
besotted protagonists of the Biblican Eden began to lose confidence in their 
ability ever to discover precisely where man's sinful history had begun. But, 
little did they know it, help of a kind was on the way, galloping down the 
centuries. When it came, however, their plight was like that of the maiden 
who, saved from ravening beasts, finds that her most cherished bastion has 
fallen before the onslaught of her rescuer. 

The discovery which demolished much Biblical scholarship of the day, 
and which accelerated its demotion from antiquarian pre-eminence to the 
relatively minor place it now occupies, was the unearthing of the earliest 
civilizations of the Mesopotamian plain lying between and around two great 
rivers, the Tigris and the Euphrates. This region had always ranked high 
among the contenders for the putative site of Eden, but its real history was 
hazy beyond the comparatively recent times dealt with by the historical books 
of the Jewish peoples. But in the second half of the nineteenth century 
Mesopotamian history was found to reach immeasurably beyond the time 
even of the Assyrians and Babylonians, the former of whom were regarded 
as so significant a people that their name was once given to the study of the 
entire region. At length, scholars who were not burdened with the necessity 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

of proving the historicity of the Bible revealed in the Land of the Two Rivers 
a totally unsuspected culture, humane, highly sophisticated, sensitively literate, 
with hints of an architectural and artistic splendour which rivalled and perhaps 
even contributed to the majesty of Old Kingdom Egypt. 13 

In the legends and myths of the mysterious inhabitants of this land the 
archetypal Eden was at last discovered, not indeed merely as a geographical 
location to be neatly sited upon a map, but as the Place where the Sun Rises, 
a land to be yearned for, the original home of gods and men. In short, there 
was now revealed the likely origin of the myth which had been echoed, 
probably more than 2,000 years after it had first been written down, by the 
authors of the Book of Genesis, who must stand, in this as in so many other 
cases, as amongst the most successful and respected of plagiarists. 

As more was discovered about the people whose poetic insight created the 
myth of the terrestrial paradise, more was also revealed about many of the 
most deep-seated beliefs and hopes of their successors. These beliefs, 
descending through the camp-fire stories of the nomadic tribes who lived 
belligerently on the periphery of the vastly superior cultures, passed in turn to 
the Hebrews, the Greeks and the Romans and so to the world of our time. 

The early inhabitants of southern Mesopotamia called their land 'Sumer', or 
more precisely, they articulated it as 'Shumer'. They also called themselves, to 
our ears simply and engagingly, 'the black-headed folk'. Theirs is the earliest 
great civilization yet to be revealed in any detail: their legacy to us is almost 
incalculable and yet they remain relatively unknown when compared, for 
example, with their near and splendid contemporaries, the Egyptians. This 
may be because the marvellous inheritance of ancient Egypt has come down 
to us in stone and metal whilst the Sumerians left a gift of words, ideas and 
legends which has only been revealed as theirs 4,000 years after they ceased 
to exist as a nation. Their most stupendous innovation, which is Sumer's special 
glory, was the creation of writing: at least no earlier system of writing than 
theirs is known. Had the Sumerians done nothing else, mankind would eternally 
have been in their debt for what is perhaps the most benign of all great 
inventions. But they did much, much more. 14 

The discovery that the myth of Eden had its origins in the records of the 
Sumerians began another quest, this time for the site of their earthly paradise, 
the name of which is transliterated today as Dilmun. Sumerologists were on 
rather firmer ground than their Biblical predecessors, for it rapidly became 
obvious that to the Sumerians, and to their Akkadian, Babylonian, Kassite 
and Assyrian successors, Dilmun was both a mythical land and a geographical 
location. 

The Hebrews did not make their Garden of Paradise a market-place, yet 
the Sumerian legends of man's primaeval existence in the blissful Land of 
the Living (one of the most frequent of Dilmun's epithets) were matched by 
matter-of-fact records of the shipments of dates and onions, stone, metal, 
timber and pearls from Dilmun. For those who find such quests down the 

10 



THE ARABIAN GULF IN ANTIQUITY 

byways of scholarship agreeable, Dilmun was a land well worth the search, 
more human in scale than Eden, happier by far in its legacy to men. The 
discountenanced band of scholars who had so earnestly sought for the Biblical 
Eden were given some small vindication by their Sumerological successors: 
at least a Paradise land existed after all, even if its gateway was more likely to 
be guarded by a customs official than by an angel with a flaming sword. 

In fact, any distinction between the mythical and the mercantile Dilmun 
is artificial and unwarranted by any of the Sumerian sources. Goddesses 
and sea captains are as indiscriminately mingled in the literary remains as 
they were in Liddell and Scott's first Greek exercises of long ago. Dilmun's 
products include, variously, copper, dates, onions shipped to the 
metropolis of Ur, and an entire cycle of vegetation brought to birth in the 
place of the assembly of the gods. It is the home of Ziusudra, the Sumerian 
prototype of Noah, and of petty kings bowing respectfully before the 
pretensions of their Mesopotamian self-proclaimed overlords. 



ON THE LOCATION OF DILMUN 

For the past century or so there has been occasional but serious academic 
argument on the issue of where Dilmun might be sited. 1 ' Allowing even for 
the asperity with which such disputes seem always to be conducted, the 
argument over Dilmun cannot be said to have raged, for Dilmunology is a 
modest science. 

From the later years of the nineteenth century onwards, academic opinion 
has decided that the metropolis of Dilmun, the terrestrial paradise and the 
flourishing entrepot, was for much of its history located in Bahrain, whose 
name in Arabic means 'the place of the two seas'. But from time to time the 
term embraced much more extensive territories than the archipelago of islands 
with which the name is associated today. 

One of the most frequently employed epithets of the Gulf itself was the 
Sea of the Rising Sun. This demonstrates the danger of taking the ancients 
seriously in the matter of geographical descriptions. No one could believe 
the Sumerians to be so obtuse or so unobservant as to imagine that the sun 
rose to the due south of their land, which could be the only conclusion if 
'sea of the rising sun' is taken literally. 

The question will be asked later in this study whether the Sumerians 
came to Mesopotamia from the south: if, as is at least possible, they came 
along a route skirting the westerly shores of the Gulf, it is conceivable that 
the Gulf was given this description by its earliest navigators, moored perhaps 
on the Arabian foreshore and looking out towards the easterly sky. From the 
Arabian mainland, the sun may well appear to rise across the sea, out of 
Bahrain itself, whose central prominence, the Jebal Dukhan, would be struck 
by its first rays: it is a perhaps questionable proposition but one that is not 

11 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

wholly insupportable. The axis of the Gulf runs south to east: as a ship sails 
southwards down its waters the axis shifts more to west to east. Thus, in the 
latitude of Bahrain, sailing southwards towards the Straits of Hormuz, the 
sun would rise apparently out of the sea's eastern horizon. But similarly, 
from the latitude of Ur, one of the most significant Sumerian cities, at certain 
times of the year the sun would appear to rise to the south and east, in other 
words over the Arabian Gulf. l6 

According to the traditions of Sumer the date-palm was brought to their 
land from the Gulf. The Sumerians, understandably in the light of the 
barrenness of their own land, respected and sought after trees. They also 
destroyed many forests and plantations in the course of providing fuel for 
one of their staple industries, copper-smelting. But the palm-tree was supreme 
in their regard and was honoured in ritual and in legend. 17 

In a hymn dedicated to Ninsinna, the goddess proclaims the antiquity 
of her city, Isin, as greater even than that of Dilmun and says: 'My house, 
before Dilmun existed, was fashioned from palm tree.' 18 The goddess 
here acknowledges the extremely important part which the date-palm 
played in Sumerian belief and legend. Growing straight and tall, it was 
unequivocally the 'tree of life' to the Sumerians and as such is often 
portrayed in their art. By tradition the palm was brought from Dilmun, on 
whose own seals (the form of which probably originated in Bahrain) it is 
a frequent motif: it was extensively cultivated in well-planted groves all 
over Sumer. The people had early discovered the high calorific value of 
the date, and they practised artificial pollination in promoting its growth 
in their otherwise treeless land. 

The date-palm (Phoenix dactylifera) is known to have been domesticated 
by 3000 BC in southern Iraq, another of the technological triumphs of the 
ever-inventive Sumerians. Though it is possible that the date palm does not 
now exist in a truly wild state, parts of coastal eastern Arabia support 
populations of uncultivated palms that are not traceable to formerly cultivated 
areas or to other activities of man. Some of these may be modified remnants 
of the original wild stock, and it is possible that the cultivated forms were 
developed here in the Arabian Gulf coastal region, as the Sumerians 
themselves believed. 

The palm-trees of Dilmun were indeed so renowned that they entered the 
common parlance of the Sumerians, as the very criterion of excellence. Thus 
a king is said to be cherished 'like a date-palm of Dilmun'. 19 When glorifying 
the sacred city of Nippur, the domain of the master of the gods Enlil himself 
(and a sort of Sumerian Vatican in the precedence which it seemed to take 
over the other god-ruled metropolitan centres), a hymnodist observes 'My 
Nippur, before Dilmun existed the palm tree grew there.' 20 This is of course 
itself a celebration of Dilmun's own vaunted antiquity. 

There is an evocative praise of trees from one of the Tammuz liturgies, which 
mentions Dilmun: Tammuz was Dummuzi, the Sumerian god of vegetation. 

12 



THE ARABIAN GULF IN ANTIQUITY 

In my right hand is a cedar, on my left is a cypress, 

My pregnant mother is a consecrated cedar 

A cedar of Hasur 

A dark tree of Tilmun. 21 

It is suggested that Hasur represents the source of the two great rivers of 
Sumer, the Tigris and the Euphrates, and Tilmun (as the Semitic form of 
Dilmun) is the place of their outpouring. This again is a reference to the 
idea that the underground springs of Bahrain (which will be further 
described below) and of the Hasa Province of Saudi Arabia were connected 
with the rivers and not, as we know to be the truth, part of the Arabian 
water-table. 

The repeated references in Sumerian and Babylonian texts to Dilmun as 
an entrepot, as an island dominion of the Mesopotamian kings in later times 
and, accepting that the eastern coast of what is now called Saudi Arabia was 
included from time to time in the geographical description, as the known 
source of the best dates in the ancient world, all confirm the view that Dilmun 
was situated in the Gulf, and Bahrain is the only wholly convincing site for 
its centre. If the Sumerians were, as has been suggested, an immigrant people 
in southern Mesopotamia, and if they came originally from the south, the 
only island landfall in the northern Gulf they could have made in what would 
have seemed to them to have been a dangerous and treacherous sea would 
have been Bahrain. 

The little island would thus have evoked grateful memories from the people 
that it sheltered. The strange lowering rock outcrop in its centre, the Jebel 
Dukhan, the Mountain of Smoke, and the altogether surprising freshwater 
springs which bubble up in the seas around the island, could well have 
added a touch of mystery and wonder to its shores. Clearly it was a land 
redolent of the gods. 

Islands have always fascinated men and there is much evidence that 
all over the ancient world they enjoyed a special reputation and sanctity 
as lands of the gods. Several Mediterranean islands shared this attribution 
of holiness, many of them being provinces of the supposed Great Mother 
goddess of remote antiquity. The Gulf is not well supplied with islands 
and it is more likely, therefore, that any new people settling on its shores 
would single out the only significant one as a sanctuary. The wealth of 
evidence which has emerged in recent years as a result of the 
archaeological work carried out in Bahrain has revealed the full and 
remarkable extent of Bahrain's early history and its exceptional 
antiquity. 22 

Since the 1950s it has been demonstrated that, from the closing centuries 
of the third millennium BC, Bahrain was an important religious centre, 
important enough to be the site of great temple complexes, markedly but 
not exclusively Sumerian in influence. Typically Mesopotamian cult and 

13 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

everyday objects have been found there and more undoubtedly wait to be 
uncovered. At least one important city flourished there; three of the principal 
sites known so far, the Qala'at al-Bahrain, Barbar and Saar, are important by 
any archaeological standards. 

In another respect Bahrain has a wholly unique claim to its inclusion in 
the annals of ancient history in the Near East: it is often described as the 
largest necropolis of the ancient world. In the north of the island the land 
surface is so pitted with burial mounds that it looks like the popular image of 
a long-dead planet. One hundred and seventy thousand tombs (perhaps 
more) are there, in which an ancient people, mysterious and, until very 
recently, quite unknown, were buried. 

Dilmun is the location for the Sumerians' explanation of the origins of 
agriculture and irrigation: it is even thought of as the place from which 
originated the god who brought the secrets of science, writing and all the 
arts to Sumer. 23 It is also the place of assembly of the Sumerian high gods, 
who were much given to collective decision-making. 

Whilst Dilmun's place in the historical records of Sumer and of its 
successor cultures the Akkadian and the Babylonian is important, the fact 
that it is found at the centre of the oldest surviving corpus of legends 
recorded in written form is surely particularly appealing today. Dilmun 
has an important place in the original Sumerian story of the Flood on 
which the Old Testament version is unquestionably based. The Flood 
legend is an episode in the world's first (and one of its greatest) epic 
histories, which introduces the most enduring and powerful figure of 
ancient legend, the heroic Gilgamesh. 24 His love for man takes him on 
the quest for the secret of the renewal of youth which he believes is to be 
found only in the blessed land of Dilmun, at the confluence of the waters 
where Ziusudra lives, on whom, alone of all mortals, the gods had 
conferred the gift of eternal life (see Chapter 10). 

On another level entirely, the control of Dilmun's trade was a matter of 
concern and pride to the sovereigns of Mesopotamia. From its busy 
harbours, shipments were made of stone, metals, foodstuffs and other 
merchandise vital to Sumer's economy. The trade routes were kept open 
to southern Arabia and even possibly to Egypt; later and above all, Dilmun's 
ships plied eastwards to the extensive and perplexing civilization of the 
Indus Valley. 



THE ARABIAN GULF 

The Gulf, a narrow almost rectangular body of water 1,000 kilometres (600 
miles) in length which, until its outpouring through the Straits of Hormuz 
into the Arabian Sea, is virtually an inland sea, does more than simply divide 
the Arabian peninsula from Iran (Map 1). At its head, its northern extremity, 

14 




15 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

in the marshlands where sky, lakes and sea all seem to merge into one, it is 
fed by the two great rivers of Mesopotamia, the Tigris and the Euphrates, on 
whose banks and extended canal irrigation systems so much of the early 
history of urban man was enacted. Geographically it is central to south- 
western Asia, linking the western edge of that great continent with the lands 
of the Iranian plateau and the Indian subcontinent. In ancient times the Gulf 
was called by a variety of names. As well as the Sea of the Rising Sun, it may 
also have been called the Waters of Death: if it is the Gulf on which Gilgamesh 
sailed in search of Ziusudra (see Chapter 10), this term would appear to have 
had some currency, though perhaps only of a literary sort. In Akkadian, 
towards the end of the third millennium, it was called Tantum Shaplitum. It 
was also called the Place of Crossing (a mysterious, ominous name) or perhaps 
the Place of Rule; the Bitter Sea may perhaps be a comment on the extreme 
salinity of the comparatively shallow waters of much of the Gulf, particularly 
in the summer months, whilst the Lower Sea was a term frequently employed 
from the late third millennium on, serving to differentiate it from the Upper 
Sea, the Mediterranean. These are both terms which reveal their Mesopotamian 
origins as well as heralding the eventual, gradual swing away from the Gulf 
to the Mediterranean as the world's principal artery of trade. 

To Herodotus 25 and Alexander 26 the Gulf was the Erythraean Sea: 
'Erythraean' means 'red' and confusingly, at this period and later, the stretch 
of water between Egypt and Arabia, now known as the Red Sea, was then 
called the Arabian Gulf; thus Ptolemy knew it. 27 To the Gulf waters were 
added the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea, all embraced within the term 
'Erythraean' at various times. 

By whatever name it might be known, the Gulf was, by early in the third 
millennium, the focus of considerable activity and development. Along the 
Arabian shore and particularly on the islands which nestle close to the 
coast, settlements were established which grew into sizeable and prosperous 
cities. The principal sites of such settlements, so far to be identified, have 
been found on Failaka island, a dependency of Kuwait; on Tarut, a small 
island close to the Saudi Arabian mainland; inland, around Abqaiq; on 
Bahrain island, at various times the political centre of the region; small 
settlements in Abu Dhabi and other of the states of the United Arab Emirates; 
and what appear to be several little townships in the Sultanate of Oman, 
where quantities of copper, the staple trade of the early Mesopotamian 
cities, were mined. 



THE CITIES OF SUMER 

The phenomenal growth of urban civilization in southern Mesopotamia, 
the most striking event of the late fourth millennium, was paradoxical in 
that the land in which the little cities of Sumer grew and flourished was 

16 



THE ARABIAN GULF IN ANTIQUITY 

almost wholly barren of the raw materials — wood, stone or metal-bearing 
ores — on which the cities depended for their rapidly developing 
manufacturing industries. These were already specialized and well 
organized, leading to the production of surplus, far beyond the needs of 
the citizens, or their ability to absorb them. The invention of the sailing- 
boat expanded the horizons of the river-based cities substantially, making 
it possible for them to mount expeditions over considerable distances both 
in search of the raw materials Mesopotamia lacked and to seek out markets 
for the disposal of the manufactured surplus which the cities' prosperous 
economies were turning out. 

After the more tentative experience gained by the simpler, smaller river 
craft which no doubt occasionally ventured out on to the relatively open 
water of the lagoons with which southern Mesopotamia was liberally 
supplied, bolder experiments in marine design might be expected. The sail 
was developed and, as a consequence of boats being capable of moving 
before the wind, journeys of vastly increased range might be contemplated 
whilst substantially larger tonnages than could be driven by oarsmen could 
be built and sent out on wide-ranging voyages. The sailing-boats on which 
much of this far-ranging travel depended were nonetheless small: the 
displacement of one typical boat in the early second millennium (and it 
probably is representative of the earlier periods as well) is estimated as 19 
tons. 28 Their range was limited by the amount of fresh water they could 
carry: their masters were cautious seamen, preferring, sensibly, to lug down 
the coast, stopping as frequently as they might, to take on water and fresh 
supplies for the next leg of the journey. Only the Arabian coast could give 
them the shelter and facilities they required: the Persian littoral was less 
favoured with natural harbours and inlets whilst its barren, rocky shore 
discouraged landfalls. 

The differences between its two shores are what chiefly gave the whole 
Gulf its historic character. On its western littoral the islands gave shelter to 
ships, and provided fodder and water; they also acted as relatively secure 
bases for trade, both for trans-shipment and as entrepots with the hinterland. 
On the western side the water is shallow and thus well suited for the loading 
and offloading of cargoes. On the eastern side, by contrast, the water is deep 
for the bed of the Gulf shelves steeply; the coast is often sheer and generally 
less hospitable than on the Arabian side. The islands on the eastern side of 
the Gulf, other than some of those near its mouth at the Gulf of Hormuz, 
seem not to have assumed the same importance as those on the Arabian 
side; many of them are barren. 

The unique character of the Gulf, historically as much as archaeologically, 
is that it is a culture of islands, the only one of importance in the western 
hemisphere in antiquity. It is this fact which gives the Gulf in ancient times 
its special character and imbues it with qualities which make it quite different 
from any other of the high cultures of antiquity. 

17 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

The little communities strung out along the eastern Arabian coast, once 
established, came to serve a variety of functions. First, they were convenient 
refuelling points, at least before the long haul from Oman to the mouth of 
the Indus Valley system far to the east; second, they provided access to the 
raw materials that Mesopotamia needed; third, they provided depots and 
outlets for manufactured goods that could be traded with the people of the 
hinterland. 

In addition to their role as entrepots, of places of trans-shipment either of 
raw materials or manufactured products, at least some of the coastal cities 
were themselves production centres. Thus, at one period, Bahrain sustained 
a copper-smelting industry, converting (in all probability) the ore which was 
mined in Oman and smelting it into ingots; it was also smelted in Oman 
itself. Agriculture, notably the cultivation of dates and onions, was an important 
element in the economy of eastern Arabia at least from the fourth millennium 
on, as was fishing, perhaps the most characteristic and the most typical way 
of life established in the region from the time of the very earliest settlements. 29 

Thus the presence, in the late fifth to early fourth millennium, of tiny 
stone tools from eastern Arabian sites, miniature awls and borers, suggests 
the existence of industralized pearl-fishing, the region's most important 
industry until well into recent times. 30 Oyster middens of great antiquity on 
Bahraini 31 and other sites suggest that the oyster-beds were fished for pearls 
and not simply for an elegant addition to the diet of the region's inhabitants. 
That fishing occupied a place in the Sumerians' ideological and philosophical 
make-up is demonstrated by the exceptional antiquity of fish-cults in the 
region and by the identification of at least one of the High Gods of Sumer, 
Enki, who has considerable connections with Bahrain and the Gulf, with 
fish and fishing. 32 

But like all other achievements of men, the paramountcy of the Gulf as a 
commercial waterway was destined to last for only a certain time. By the 
early centuries of the second millennium the axis of world politics and trade 
was already swinging away to the north and west, to the Levant, hence to the 
eastern Mediterranean and to the newly emerging lands of the Aegean. It is 
even possible that there was some form of population movement from the 
Gulf headlands into the Levantine coast, perhaps brought about by one of 
the marked, often short-term changes of climate to which the region seems 
always to have been subject, or by the inability of the coastal settlements to 
sustain the level of population developed during the late third millennium. 
Such a radical change may perhaps have come about as a consequence, in 
turn, of the invasions in the east and north which seem to have created 
havoc, in a time of general disunity and political confusion throughout near 
eastern lands, notably among the city-states of southern Mesopotamia, in 
the early centuries of the second millennium BC. 



18 



THE ARABIAN GULF IN ANTIQUITY 

THE LATER HISTORY OF THE GULF 

The Gulf and eastern Arabia sank into relative obscurity after the eighteenth/ 
seventeenth centuries BC, with only an occasional incident or entry in a 
contemporary record to illuminate the apparent general gloom of the times. 
Mesopotamian rulers still claimed sovereignty over the Gulf as much by 
convention and the recollection of the splendours of past conquerors as by 
any real need to control what had become a literal backwater. For over a 
thousand years this situation persisted; then, from around the eighth century 
BC, there is evidence of a return of considerable prosperity to eastern Arabia 
and the Gulf islands. 

This renaissance of the region, marked by the development of cities whose 
luxury and riches were proverbial, arose directly from the fortunes associated 
with the spice-trade, the extraordinary commerce in aroma tics such as 
frankincense and myrrh which grow in abundance in southern Arabia and 
whose traffic gave rise to societies whose only purpose was to service the 
caravans, or to take tolls from them. 33 It was this trade, supported in particular 
by the large-scale domestication of the camel, making long-ranging land 
routes possible, comparable in extent even with the earlier sea routes, which 
drew Arabia again to the attention of the major world powers of the day. 

The spice-trade was, in its own day, as important a factor in the economy 
of first-millennium Arabia as fossil hydrocarbons and the oil industry which 
has grown up to exploit them are to Arabia in the present day. Gerrha in 
eastern Arabia was founded around 690 BC: her inhabitants were said by 
Agatharchides to be the richest people in the world. 

The last emperor of Babylon, Nabonidos (589-556 BC), established his 
capital at Tayma in northern Arabia and burials of neo-Babylonian date have 
been excavated on Bahrain. No doubt the Babylonians were there for purposes 
of trade, as inscriptions of the period make clear. 34 



THE GREEKS AND THE ORIGINS OF THE 
LEVANTINE CITIES 

This return of Arabia to the consciousness of the larger world later coincided 
with the first waves of serious scientific curiosity, associated with the 
intellectual dynamism of the emerging Greek world. From the time of 
Herodotos onwards, accounts of the Gulf and eastern Arabia appear in the 
histories, geographies and other scientific treatises which the Greeks and 
their Roman successors delighted in producing. 

At the beginning of his first book Herodotos considers the nature of the 
Greeks and 'the Asiatics' (the Persians, in other words) and the origins of 
their conflict. The Persians, he observes, put the responsibility for the quarrel 
on the Phoenicians who, the Persian learned men say, 'came to our seas 

19 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

from the sea which is called Red and having settled in the country which 
they still occupy at once begain to make long voyages'. 35 In Book VII, when 
he analyses the composition of Xerxes' forces he relates how 'the Phoenicians 
with the Syrians of Palestine, contributed 300 tribesmen. . . these people have 
a tradition that in ancient times they lived on the Persian Gulf but migrated to 
the Syrian coast, where they are found today.' 36 

The people of Tyre, that ancient and once splendid city, insisted on their 
Gulf origins. At one time the principal Bahrain island was called Tylos: it 
would be entirely consistent with philological precedent for the / to become 
an r. However, Tylos appears late in the record, certainly long after the 
establishment of Tyre. Even the Old Testament, not always to be relied on 
for its historical accuracy, preserves a memory of Tyre in association with 
'Eden, the Garden of God'. Thus in Ezekiel the prophet says: 'O Tyre, you 
have said "I am perfect in beauty." Your borders are in the heart of the sea. 
. . .You were in Eden, the garden of God: every precious stone was your 
covering.' 37 

It may be observed that, in this translation at least, Tyre's borders are said 
to be 'in the heart of the sea' — a description not wholly appropriate for a 
coastal city, which could certainly not be said to be 'in the heart of the sea', 
but perfectly proper for an island. 

Herodotos was not the only ancient author to examine and chronicle 
the Phoenicians' belief that they came originally from the coasts of the 
Gulf and, in particular, from the islands. Alexander's contemporary 
Androsthenes was one whose now lost work was extensively cited by 
other classical authors, of whom Strabo was the most influential. He records 
the tradition that the inhabitants of the Gulf islands in his time (the first 
century AD) believed that the Phoenician cities of Tyre and Arados were 
seeded by colonists from the Gulf islands which, in his time, bore the 
nearly identical names of Tylos and Arad (Bahrain and Muharraq as they 
are known today). 

The evidence for a Gulf colonization of the Phoenician coast and the 
possible authenticity of the traditions here referred to have been reviewed in 
recent years. 38 This accepts the Phoenician tradition, as relayed by Herodotos, 
as a genuine expression of that people's belief about their origins; it also 
suggests that in late antiquity this belief about the origins of the Phoenicians 
was widespread. 

There is a consideration which has been largely overlooked by other 
commentators. Strabo recalls a reference in the Odyssey in which Homer 
speaks of 'the Sidonians', in association with peoples who came from the 
shores of what is today called the Red Sea. Strabo suggests that these Sidonians 
are, in fact, not the inhabitants of the city of Sidon, but rather those who 
dwell in the Arabian Gulf, from whom the original Sidonians were descended. 
He draws the parallel between the Sidonians and the inhabitants of Tyre and 
Arad, as colonists in the same sense, from the Gulf islands. 

20 



THE ARABIAN GULF IN ANTIQUITY 

In late antiquity, in the Graeco-Roman world at least, there was a widely 
held tradition concerning the origins of the Phoenician coastal cities, that 
they had been colonized from the Gulf islands. Herodotos even puts a date 
on when he thinks the original migration took place: 2,300 years before his 
day. Herodotos was writing in approximately 450 BC, so the migration would 
have taken place, roughly, in 2750 BC. This is firmly in the middle of the 
period when there is in fact little evidence of occupation at all in Bahrain, 
though there seems to have been a good deal going on in the eastern province 
of Saudi Arabia. However, it is specifically with the islands of the Gulf that 
the tradition deals and there is no reason to assume that it means anything 
other than what it says. 

One aspect of historical writing often does reveal Herodotos as something 
less than his best: this is whenever he is dealing with chronology, a subject 
on which the ancients tended to be as shaky as in their understanding of 
direction or distance. If Herodotos' date is reduced by a thousand years 
(admittedly a fairly brutal reduction), the proposed date for the transfer of 
population from the Gulf to Phoenicia is then sited at the end of the first 
quarter of the second millennium, just when the high Dilmunite culture of 
the preceding 500 years or so seems to decline sharply. This is the point at 
which the Indus Valley cities no longer represent the lucrative and ready 
markets of the east and the Kassite mountain-dwellers came down on the 
cities of Babylonia and the Gulf. A migration at this date would be entirely 
plausible and, indeed, there is some evidence for it. 

Later in this review of the Gulf in antiquity some consideration will be 
given to the place in its history of the island of Failaka, in the Bay of Kuwait. 
Failaka seems to have been associated particularly with religious festivals and 
cults which featured bulls. If Failaka was involved in this putative migration, 
which may well have been a relatively gradual process extending over several 
generations rather than any sort of mass exodus (although there is evidence of 
what seems to have been a hasty evacuation of the island in Old Babylonian 
times), 39 some of the cults associated with more western parts of the ancient 
world, including the bull-cults of Crete for example, a few centuries later, may 
have had their origins in the Gulf islands. It has already been suggested that 
one of the Gulfs frequent short-term climate changes may have been the 
occasion for the population finding it necessary to reduce the numbers of their 
parent settlement and setting out to find a new place in which to establish 
themselves. Since Dilmunite merchants had been travelling deep into northern 
Syria and southern Anatolia for centuries they would have been quite familiar 
with the Phoenician coast and with the rich lands which lay behind it. 40 Their 
predilection for coastal islands, too, would have been well met by the siting of 
what were to become Tyre and Arados. 

The Gulf and its islands continued to figure spasmodically in the reports 
of the writers of late antiquity. After that period this corner of south-west 
Asia seems to have entered one of its periods of relative decline, certainly of 

21 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

obscurity. The reasons for the apparent decline may, once again, have been 
climatic or the consequences of war. The Muslim historians did not concern 
themselves with the times before Islam very much, though the Quran itself, 
as will be seen below, introduces an enigmatic and mysterious element into 
the region's history or, more exactly, into its mythology. Otherwise, long 
centuries passed during which any importance which once the region may 
have had was all but forgotten by the world. 

After the splendid centuries of the Arab empires, when the thirst for trade 
drove Arab argosies across the world from the Gulf to China, the depredations 
of the Mongols, the rise of the Ottoman Empire, internal dissension and 
foreign invasion induced a strange lassitude in the lands of the Middle and 
Near East. Though occasional travellers penetrated Arabia and returned to 
tell curious tales of a remote people whose ways were markedly different 
from those of the western world, which was growing more and more confident 
of its role in the management of nations, the peninsula was allowed to slumber 
undisturbed. As the centuries rolled by, the heavy burden of the Ottoman 
bureaucracy bore down upon eastern Arabia, penetrating in its final years 
even to Qatar, just across the Gulf from Bahrain. 



THE GULF IN THE MODERN AGE 

The Gulf itself began to stir once again in the European consciousness 
during the eighteenth century. That most hardy and dedicated of travellers, 
the young Dane, Carsten Niebhur, travelled its length and included reports 
of it in his quite remarkable book, published in 1774 (in the French 
edition) 41 which attracted some mild attention among scholars and savants. 
The growing power of Britain in India was the factor which in time 
prompted the principal change in European attitudes, and it led in time 
to an awakening of scholarly interest in the region's past. In the later 
years of the eighteenth century, Britain, concerned with the need to protect 
her sea lanes to India, which were vital to the prosperity of her developing 
industrial cities, successfully eliminated French competition in Arabia and 
the lower reaches of the Gulf. The French presence had, for the while, 
seemed to pose a significant threat to what Britain had increasingly come 
to see as her necessary paramountcy in the area. The French had 
established a foothold in Muscat; in 1798 the British effected their expulsion 
and themselves entered into a treaty with the ruler of Oman. 42 Then another 
problem reared its head which was deemed to require British action: the 
nefarious activities of the celebrated pirates of the east Arabian coast. 

'Pirates' is, of course, a term which the European interest in the area has 
applied to the freebooters who sailed the southern Gulf seas and who were 
a considerable nuisance to the free passage of the merchant ships sailing to 
and from the Indian Empire ports. Arab writers of the present day prefer to 

22 



THE ARABIAN GULF IN ANTIQUITY 

see them as independent-minded fighters for freedom, kicking against the 
presence of the colonial power which, with remarkable prescience, they are 
considered to have recognized as such a good deal earlier than most other 
peoples. 43 

The truth is more probably that, pirates or freedom fighters or whatever, 
they were really seaborne Badu who, like their land-based brothers, saw 
any strangers not directly under their protection as fair game. The rich cargoes 
that sailed to and from India, British and otherwise, also had the attraction of 
being carried by the ships of the infidel, making their seizure an act of piety 
as much as of profit. 

A series of judicious treaties with the shaikhs of the Gulf coast eventually 
cut off the freebooters' land support. Gradually their activities ceased, their 
going marked by the occasional startlingly dramatic incident such as the case 
of the Qatari-based buccaneer, Rahma binjaber. Trapped at last in Khor after 
a lifetime of merciless harrying of the coastal ports and the shipping that 
served them, Rahma, with his 10-year-old son clasped to his breast, ignited a 
load of gunpowder in his hold and blew himself, his son and his ship to 
immortality in the year 1826, off the coast near Dammam in Saudi Arabia. 

With the British maintaining a watchful eye on the seas around the Gulf 
and with British diplomatic activity directed largely towards the shaikhs who 
were the ancestors of the rulers of the modern states, matters remained 
relatively peaceful throughout the nineteenth century, punctuated only by 
the occasional flurry when a dynastic or clan dispute between the shaikhs 
and their followers might assume proportions which could not be ignored. 
Such occasions requiring British intervention were rare; Britain had, by virtue 
of the treaties which she had engineered with the shaikhs, made herself 
responsible for their relations with such foreign powers as might presume an 
interest in the area. Thus effectively she prevented any power other than 
herself from taking a real interest in what was going on in a corner of the 
world which was, in any case, in the eyes of most foreign observers, remote 
and insignificant. 

In such circumstances it is not be be wondered at that most of the early 
archaeological survey and excavation in the Gulf was carried out by British 
scholars and amateurs. Although most of them, as will be seen, were diligent 
in reporting their work, the Gulf was not judged to be a rewarding area for 
research until well into the twentieth century. 



23 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF 
ARCHAEOLOGY 



Those who derive pleasure from the observation of ancient peoples and the 
places in which they lived find a special excitement in the descriptions of the 
first uncovering of the evidences of long buried and forgotten civilizations 
by those who originally identified them and who recorded the traces of their 
lives and deaths. The impact, the immediacy and, above all, the enthusiasm 
of the excavators' reports of those often small triumphs which later became 
the common currency of archaeology more than compensate for their 
occasional inaccuracy or, sometimes, downright fantasy. Nothing can detract 
from the excitement which a reading of Carter on Tutankhamun, Woolley on 
the Royal Graves at Ur, or Evans creating an entire world out of the mounds 
of Knossos (and, to a substantial degree, his imagination) instantly inspires. 
Happily, the story of the development of archaeological expedition and 
research in the Arabian Gulf begins with such a record. 

In the winter of 1878, the first step in the archaeology of the Arabian Gulf 
was taken when a young British Officer, Captain E.L.Durand, came ashore at 
Muharraq, the smaller of the two principal islands of Bahrain in the Arabian 
Gulf, and then the seat of its commerce and government. His purpose was to 
undertake a survey of the island's antiquities, the first scientific review of 
Bahrain's past yet attempted, at least since Roman times or when Alexander 
sent his admirals to survey the Arabian coast and its islands. Captain E.L.Durand 
was First Assistant Resident, attached to the staff of Her Britannic Majesty's 
Political Resident, then based at Bushire, on the southern coast of Persia. 

The appointment of 'Political Resident' was one of those somewhat 
imprecise titles with which British imperial servants were often labelled. It 
was a rank which was distinctly proconsular; its bearers, latterly, were entitled 
to the same formal courtesies as Ambassadors and indeed they outranked 
most. In the Gulf they were not merely the most senior political officials 
serving there, their writ running from Kuwait to Oman, but they also bore 
the burden of military command and were responsible for the British forces 
in the area. The post of Political Resident in the Gulf continued to be filled 
until the British withdrawal from their long-standing treaties of protection 
with the shaikhs of the Gulf in 1971. By that time the Gulf was the last 

24 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

posting in the British foreign service where the rank of Political Resident was 
still to be found; by then, and by a neat contortion of history, the seat of the 
Political Residence had shifted from Bushire to Bahrain itself. 

In 1878 the Political Resident (then a less august rank than it was to become) 
was responsible not to the Foreign Office in London, but to the Government 
of India's Foreign Department in Calcutta. It was from this Department that 
Durand bore his mandate and it was to its Secretary, A.C. Lyall (later Sir 
Alfred and a Privy Councillor), that the Resident himself, Lieutenant-Colonel 
E.C.Ross (later Sir Edward) forwarded the report which Durand prepared at 
the conclusion of his mission. 

Durand's report is the first document in the archaeology both of the Gulf 
and of the Bahrain islands; it is also one of the most important. It exists in 
two versions and an examination of them reveals certain telling differences 
between them. 

The version which is most frequently quoted and which is generally 
used by archaeologists or commentators is the text as published in the 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (new series), 12 (Part II), 1880, pp. 
189-227, in which it is described as 'Extracts from Report on the Islands 
and Antiquities of Bahrain, by Captain Durand'. 1 Some twelve small pages 
of letterpress follow, punctuated by a reproduction of Bahrain's most 
celebrated artefact, the 'Durand stone', an Old Babylonian inscription 
recording the pious claim of one Rimum, who describes himself as the 
'servant' of Dilmun's tutelary divinity. It is this discovery which is taken by 
most authorities to identify Bahrain decisively as the Dilmun of Sumerian 
and later myth and history. The identification was made by Sir Henry 
Rawlinson, perhaps the most distinguished specialist of his day in 
Mesopotamian studies, who appended a series of 'Notes' to the extracts 
from Durand's report and who was at that time the President and Director 
of the Royal Asiatic Society. 2 

This form of Durand's observations is an edited version of his full report 
which his superior official sent on to his superior in India. 3 There are several 
discrepancies between the two versions which are relevant and, in some 
cases, slightly surprising, for the official report is far more freely written; 
indeed, it is positively winsome in places. From the historical and 
archaeological standpoints, it is also much more extensive; perhaps Durand 
felt he was writing there for colleagues and friends who would understand 
more readily than the readers of the Journal both his scholarship and his 
more parenthetical comments on the pursuit of his studies in so remote and 
outlandish a location. 

Further, the report contains an important element which the Journal article 
lacks: a number of fine illustrations, some full-page, others details inset into 
the text, all evidently prepared by Durand himself. By the evidence of the 100 
or so drawings deposited in the India Office Library Durand was a competent 
water-colourist. Sadly, none of his Bahraini drawings seems to have survived. 

25 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

The first illustration in the report is a map which shows the position of 
Bahrain (spelt in the map and throughout the text 'Bahrein') in the Gulf 
relative to the Qatar peninsula and the coast of what is now part of the 
Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia. The map has several features which make 
it unusual. It is evidently based on an earlier publication. 

The principal island, Bahrain proper, is shown reasonably accurately. To 
the north-east lies the island of Muharraq, now linked to its larger partner by 
a causeway, then separated by a sea channel. To the west of Bahrain is 
shown the island of 'Umm en Hussan', presumably Umm Nassan. Various 
sites are marked on the Arabian coast further to the west. These include 
Geriyeh, Ojeir and Dohali Suhoa: no settlements of these names are known 
today though the last two probably conceal Ugair and Dohat-as-Salwa, whilst 
the first seems to recall the ancient and so far undiscovered emporium of 
Gerrha; the name may simply have been misinterpreted by Durand. The 
deep bay which lies behind Bahrain, between the Qatar peninsula and the 
mainland coast now called the Bay of Salwa, is shown on Durand's map with 
a dotted line; he was apparently uncertain of its outline when he prepared 
the map and speculated that the sea ran south and east, almost cutting off the 
Qatar peninsula. He identifies Al-Bida'a, the village which was the forerunner 
of Doha, Qatar's present-day capital. 

More surprisingly he marked 'Khor el Udaid', an inlet of singular beauty, 
at the point where Qatar's territory today marches with that of the United 
Arab Emirates. It is difficult to reach, and it must be presumed that Durand 
has sailed round the Qatar coast to this point, though he makes it clear that 
he did not penetrate the Bay of Salwa. 

A notable feature of the map is that the entire Qatar peninsula is marked 
'El Bahrein'. When Durand landed Qatar was largely under the control of a 
remarkable shaikh of the Al-Thani family, Jassim bin Thani, whose 'pic-nic' 
in the desert in 1855 had been charmingly described by Palgrave in his 
Travels in Central and Eastern Arabia^ Shaikh Jassim lived on into the 
twentieth century and a notable description exists of him as a very old man 
riding out into the desert attended by a host of his sons, grandsons and 
retainers. However, in Durand's day, the Al-Khalifa princes in Bahrain 
considered that the city of Zubara in the north of Qatar, which they had 
founded in the eighteenth century during the migration of the Utub tribes, 
first to the east and then southwards, was their stronghold on the mainland 
and that they were the lawful rulers of the Qatar peninsula. This view they 
have indeed maintained to this day, especially as regards the disputed islands 
of Hawar. It would seem that at this point at least the Government of India, 
as the protecting power, agreed with them. In attaching the name 'Bahrein' 
to the Qatar peninsula, however, Durand was perpetuating a form of 
topographical nomenclature which was very ancient. Even in the earliest 
times, and certainly right down to the Islamic period, eastern Arabia had 
often been called by the same name as that of the principal island in the 

26 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

Bahrain group, which thus may be seen always to have been the dominant 
influence in the region. 

Durand's report in its original version submitted to the Viceroy's office is 
a more elegant document than the Journal extracts. Each photograph is 
numbered in the manner of such productions; the pages are long, the typeface 
large and clear. Durand's remarks begin unpropitiously, at least as far as 
Bahrain's prospects for commerce are concerned. 

Trade — There is not much to be said about the trade of these islands. 

Pearls and dates are the chief, almost the only exports but the statistics 
are annually given in the reports. The import trade, consisting chiefly 
of rice, coffee and cloth, is mostly carried on by buniahs from Hindustan, 
those resident here being men in a very small way of business, the 
larger capitalists coming over for the pearl season only. 

The trade operations of these islands might be greatly extended 
under a settled Government; if for instance the British Government 
held them they would draw the trade of the whole Persian Gulf and be 
a trade centre, from which Persia and Arabia would be supplied and 
drained. I say boldly that there would be no merchants left in any of 
the ports subject to Native rule in the whole of the Gulf from Basrah to 
Maskat, except the agents necessary for clearing the customs and passing 
on consignments inland. 

A glance at the map will show that, with no labour to speak of, a 
most excellent harbour could be brought up to the very doors of the 
ware-houses, which might be built on land reclaimed from the sea. 

This last comment is prophetic, if Durand means what his words seem to 
mean. In the light of Bahrain's more recent history, when a substantial increase 
in the habitable land presently available has been brought about by the 
Government's policy of land reclamation around the shores of Muharraq 
and the northern part of the principal Bahrain island, it is remarkable that 
Durand seems to have been proposing precisely the same thing in 1879- 

The land reclaimable stretches almost from the Portuguese fort to the 
island of Muharrak, and all that would be necessary to effect this would 
be a wall of stones carried out at low tide if necessary, and built up by 
degrees. During the present full moon and low tides I have seen the land 
dry to where the coral reefs sink abruptly into deep water. 

Durand quotes Pliny's observation that the Arabs believed that the 
Euphrates debouched into the Gulf from an underground stream, surfacing 
in these parts. No doubt this was an attempt to explain the freshwater springs 
which rise up in the seabed and which may well account both for Bahrain's 
name in Arabic ('the two seas') and her reputation of special sanctity in 

27 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

ancient times. The report's quotation from Pliny reads 'Flumen per quod 
Euphratem emergere putant' whilst the Journal, more correctly, reads 
'Euphraten flumen per quoddam Arabiae emergere putant.' 

The occasional errors in the text printed in Calcutta, of which this seems 
to be one, suggest that Durand was able to proofread the Journal but not the 
report. Since the Journal extracts appear to be based on the report's actual 
text, Durand would have been able to correct any errors which had crept 
into the earlier version. An engaging example appears a little later in the 
report where the celebrated eighteenth-century French cartographer, 
D'Anville, is discovered quaintly disguised as 'Dr. Anville'. Many of the 
spellings, even of classical references, are eccentric and suggest that the 
report was printed without its author's supervision. The occasional inelegancies 
of language and non sequiturs in the text support this impression. 

In the report Durand compares the underground waters in Bahrain with 
the Persian qanats but he evidently does not feel, in the Journal, that the 
reference supports his argument. He perhaps did not know of the existence 
of qanats in Bahrain; they were, until quite recent times, a notable factor in 
the island's agricultural economy. 

A charming marginal drawing appears in the report to illustrate a comment 
he makes about the conduits of drinking water: 

The water is conducted from these various wells by ordinary unbanked 
channels, the larger of which have now come to look like natural streams. 
Where it is necessary to raise it this is done from wells by the ordinary 
skin bucket let down over a pulley and walked up to the cistern level 
by cattle pulling down an incline; from channels generally by leverage 
of a date trunk lightly swung by ropes to a frame, and balanced at one 
end by a basket of earth into which it is inserted, so that little exertion 
is required to lift up the water. 

He captions his drawing, diffidently, 'something like this'. Durand permits 
himself a more vivid prose in the report than in the Journal. Thus the graves 
concealed within the mounds which are the principal focus of his 
archaeological interest ('dead-houses' he calls them) and the description of 
the dusty ground characterizing the region near the coast ('the relic', in the 
Journal's words, 'probably of former habitations'), appears in the report as 
'the cerecloth of dead races and habitations'. 

The report contains some eighteen paragraphs devoted to a description 
of the plant and wildlife of the island. It seems from these descriptions that 
Durand liked animals and enjoyed their ways. 

The hares are about the size of a three-quarter grown English rabbit, 
very small and blood-locking [sic] with prominent eyes. This casty look 
is noticeable in every Arabian animal, man included. The Arab horse is 

28 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

well known, but the Arab greyhound of which a really good specimen 
is seldom obtainable, is a most beautiful animal, so light and slender as 
to seem useless for work, but when going, appearing rather to fly than 
gallop. These hares are easily tamed; I had two, rescued from a hawk 
and a greyhound respectively, which after four days became so tame 
that they played about the room, hopping up occasionally to see what 
I was doing, and only retiring behind a box on the arrival of a stranger. 

His description of the plight of the date plantations, even then a matter of 
concern, is clearly warmly felt: 

Trees and Plants — Foremost amongst the trees is of course the date and 
some of the date-gardens are extremely fine. Many however are going 
and gone to ruin, the result of bad Government, and indeed in some 
places that were once flourishing gardens not a bearing tree remains. 

Like many visitors to Arabia he dilates upon the hazards of camel-riding: 

The camels are mostly from Arabia, though they are now bred here in 
the marshes. A few good ones for riding purposes are owned by the 
Sheikhs. These feed even when going at a sharp trot giving the 
unaccustomed rider an odd feeling of helplessness, as the long neck 
disappears in front and head becomes mixed up with the animal's legs; 
this feeling is soon replaced by one of implicit confidence when you 
get accustomed to the acrobatic performance, and find that no harm 
comes of it. 

He inserts a charming drawing of a fish which particularly caught his eye. 
Durand describes him affectionately, though fishes with coats may seem 
unlikely ichthyological phenomena. 

There are several sorts offish in the fresh water. One with peculiar marking 
drew my attention. I have never seen him noticed. The dorsal fin is the 
centre of 3 circular or oval bands of dark colour, which show very plainly 
against the silver sides of the fish and present odd effect when he swims. 
The largest I saw was only probably a few ounces in weight. It would 
almost seem as if he had caught the colour of his coat from swimming 
constantly in these shallow crystal waters shaded by the long thin spikes 
of date palm but perhaps this is too Darwinian, as although fish do 
constantly take, and even change their colour from the sort of water they 
live in, they would scarcely take their marking in this manner. 

Durand evidently kept abreast of current academic development as his 
reference to Darwin reveals. The Origin of Species had been published in 1859- 

29 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

One of his most remarkable passages refers to his identification of a group 
of mounds near the village of 'Barboora' (modern Barbar) as of particular 
importance. He recognized that one large stone block on the surface had 
been worked; with remarkable perception he describes one square-cut hole 
having been made 'as if for a door-jamb'. The site was not excavated until 
more than seventy years after Durand's visit but the excavations then identified 
the block which he saw, which was still on the surface, as part of the entrance 
to the third of the temples which had been built at Barbar during the very 
late third and early second millennia. 

Early on in his description of the fields of grave-mounds which were 
Bahrain's principal antiquarian interest in his day, he inserts a lengthy comment 
about the possibly Phoenician origin of Bahrain's antiquities and the 
Herodotean story about the origins of the Phoenicians themselves: the 
Phoenicians suggested that their origins lay in the Gulf, or, at any rate, the 
upper reaches of the Indian Ocean. Since he quotes 'Mr. Rawlinson' extensively 
(he presumably was unaware of Sir Henry's baronetcy) he may have been 
tactful to excise these comments in the Journal knowing that Rawlinson was 
indeed going to comment in print on the Journal extracts. However, one 
paragraph is worth quoting, if only for the very odd epithet employed for 
Alexander the Great, who sent his admirals to survey the Gulf and its islands 
towards the end of his life. 

It will however scarcely be called in question that these islands of Bahrain 
were in old days inhabited by a Phoenician race, and that they had here 
temples to their gods actually seen by Androsthenes, when he led the 
naval expedition under orders from the Macedonian boy-conquerer. 

Herodotos may have been vindicated in his belief about Phoenician origins 
more than a century later, but Durand ascribed the origins of the remains on 
Bahrain to the Phoenicians quite erroneously. Durand's Journal extracts 
contain but one page of illustrations and that is devoted to his most important 
discovery, the inscription which is frequently referred to as 'the Durand stone', 
and which by its mention of the god Inzak, the tutelary divinity of Bahrain, 
suggested to Rawlinson the identification of Bahrain with Dilmun. The report 
describes its finding and the slightly deceitful way in which Durand persuaded 
the keepers of the mosque in whose wall it was imbedded to part with it. 
Then he says: 

I thought at first that it might be the prow or figurehead of some old 
ship, and I suppose this is possible. At any rate, however, we know 
that the Phoenicians above all worshipped the Phallus, and that the 
goddess Astarte, their particular favourite and the protectress of mariners, 
was worshipped by them under the form of a conical stone. Whether 
under this form she was even let into the prows of their ships I cannot 

30 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

say; as a figure-head I believe that her image was so used. This, however, 
is a mere speculation, the writing will probably tell its own tale. 

How he can have imagined a 60-cm (2-foot) long piece of basalt (if that is 
what it was) ever to have been the figurehead of a ship is difficult to imagine. 
It is less surprising that again he should drag in the Phoenicians, this time in 
a very nineteenth-century disguise as phallus-worshippers. 

Durand then takes off for several paragraphs into a splendidly irrelevant 
and curious piece of historical fantasy, prompted by the inscription, which 
involves the legendary origins of the Arabs and their possible incursions into 
Europe in very early times. He writes of the inscription: 

Here again is a puzzle to any but an adept. Some of the characters are 
evidently ordinary cuneiform, whether of Babylonian, Assyrian, or 
Achaemenian, the type seems much the same but some of the characters 
interspersed are hieroglyphic, as well as the tree or palm bough itself 
probably, that stands on the left of the inscription, a fact that might 
point to the stone having been engraved at a time when emblematic 
writing was being converted into alphabetical. This again is mere 
surmise. At any rate it is not of the real Phoenician type that Cadmus 
taught the Greeks, and from which their alphabet emanated, as the 
Phoenicians were supposed to have known this writing 1500 years BC. 

Mr. Rawlinson would, I think, make Cadmus merely a mythical 
personage, under the form of Kedem the East, seeking Ereb the West, 
or Europe, but still he admits the cumulative force of the arguments 
that he enumerates, as very great towards the proof of a Phoenician 
settlement in Boeotia. 

Going further than he does Mr. Forster says 'that this name of Cadmus 
can be traced through Kademah or Kadmas', which latter form, he 
states, to be a truly Arabic idiomatic one, and quotes it, through Melo, 
through Eusebius, and Alexander Polyhistor who gives the twelve sons 
of Abraham (Ishmael) by his Egyptian wife, and again that the only 
'direct notice of the Arabs are among the early peoples of Europe to be 
found among the classic writers occurs in Strabo, who in his account of 
the peopling of Euboea off the coast of Boeotia reckons as the first 
inhabitants a colony of Arabs, who had accompanied Cadmus into 
Greece'. This statement carries within itself marks of its authenticity, 
since all the circumstances of the case attest the correctness of Strabo 's 
information, &c. &c. He then continues that Cadmus is simply the Greek 
form of Kedemah, which is rendered Kedinah in the LXX, and Cadmos 
by Josephius, and the Ishmaelite tribe of Kedemah, we have already 
seen, was seated in the very locality assigned on independent grounds 
as the cradle of the Phoenician Cadmus, the namesake, and it may 
justly be inferred the youngest son of Ishmael. 

31 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

He further goes on to clench his argument with an Arab tradition 
also proving the National consanguinity between the Peloponnesians 
and Boeotians and the Arabs (zebeydi Ishmaelites). 

To return, however, without being sure that Cyrus rules these islands, 
we know that Darius did as they formed a part of his 14th satrapy, and 
were used by his as a penal settlement (the jockey King could scarcely 
have invented a better). 

'Jockey King' is surely a peculiar epithet for Darius. It stems, no doubt, 
from a legend of Darius' origins and his unlikely election as Great King, in 
which one of his horses played a crucial, even a decisive, role. It is intriguing, 
by the way, that Durand should be speculating about the possibility of a 
Phoenician influence on Greece in early times, a reversal of the view which 
was gaining strength in his day, that Greece owed nothing either to Semitic 
(Phoenician) influences or to others which might have come from Africa 
(Egypt). 

The stone may therefore well belong to this period of Persian rule, or 
again it may simply have found its way down from Assyria. The latter 
being the most likely, for the cuneiform seems to me to differ from the 
Achaemenian that I have seen, and the more so that no signs are used 
under that form of writing . Of course an expert would settle the question 
at once. 

Durand's suggestion of the possibility of the stone having migrated from 
Assyria is not one which most scholars have followed, though it is by no 
means unreasonable. The question may well be asked why anyone should 
wish to transport a substantial piece of basalt from Assyria to the midst of the 
Gulf, and the improbability of such an action seems to have satisfied most 
commentators since Durand's day. But there is little doubt that the inscription 
which Durand reproduces belongs to the first half of the second millennium 
BC. 

Durand's illustration of the inscription in the report is quite unlike the 
drawing of it which appears in the Journal extract. That in the report is 
drawn from a 'squeeze', a popular technique in the nineteenth century for 
the rapid copying of inscriptions of engravings in stone achieved by applying 
to the inscription a papier mache or similar coating which, when it was 
removed, bore a negative impression of the subject. This is what Durand 
shows in the report. It must, one imagines, have puzzled the officials in the 
Viceroy's Foreign Department, for it is reproduced upside-down and in reverse. 

Rawlinson translated the inscription for Durand, thus introducing his 
brilliant contribution to the archaeology of Dilmun. But this was not his first 
attempt. In a footnote to Paragraph 6 of the report, Rawlinson (now properly 
acknowledged as 'Sir H. Rawlinson', incidentally) is referred to gratefully by 
Durand, but the 'translation' is very much a first draft. 

32 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 




Figure 2.1 The burial mounds, as sketched by Durand. 

At this point in the report Durand interposes two drawings of the great 
mounds at Aali in the northern part of Bahrain (or Ali, as he prefers it) which 
really form the focus of his report and of which he remarked earlier, though 
perhaps optimistically, 'with regard to the tumuli, we are standing on surer 
ground and cannot go far wrong.' 

The drawings which Durand prepared for the report are really very 
handsome. They suggest vividly the commanding character of the Aali mounds 
before they were subject either to the archaeologist's spade or to the attention 
of the village potters, who have all but destroyed them in converting many 
of them into kilns. The drawings convey, as no other representation does, 
the massive size and extent of the mounds as they evidently appeared in 
Durand's day (Fig. 2.1). Certainly the quality of his illustrations varies 
considerably, ranging from what are plainly rapid sketches to more finished 
drawings; his plans are neat and informative, the first attempts accurately to 
depict any of the Bahrain tumuli and to plot the area in which they were to 
be found. His drawing of the fill in one of the entrance passages to one of 
the mounds is masterly, positively gothic, indeed. 

Durand, both in the Journal extracts and in the report, speculates about 
the inhabitants of the islands who built these tremendous tombs. As he 
remarks, 'I have not heard of such another necropolis above ground in the 
world.' He believes, on balance, that Bahrain was a sepulchral island, a 
Toteninsel, a holy place to which the dead were brought for burial from the 



33 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

mainland, perhaps, he suggests, from the lost city of Gerrha. He presumes 
that such inhabitants as the island possessed lived in simple houses built 'of 
the branches of the palm-tree, as do the poorer classes to the present day'. 
The type of indigenous building to which he refers is the barasti, which, 
until the setting up of Government-financed housing schemes, was the most 
common form of domestic dwelling in Bahrain. 

Durand had a natural archaeologist's eye, still perhaps the most important 
professional tool that anyone who follows its practice can possess. The 
mounds at 'Barboora' to which he refers early in his comments are evidently 
those sited near the modern village of Barbar. The Danes lighted on these 
mounds early on in their work in Bahrain, and in excavations in the 1950s 
and 1960s uncovered a remarkable series of temples of a type which seems 
to link them with the successors of the Sumerians in southern Mesopotamia, 
possibly with the Sumerians themselves. Prominent among the structures 
which they excavated, the Danes found a magnificent stone well, which 
perhaps suggests that the temple was consecrated to Enki, the great god of 
the Apsu or the Abyss, to whom Rawlinson refers in his comments on 
Durand's report, under the name 'Hea'; an aspirated form of his Semitic 
(Akkadian) name, Ea. Given the excavation methods of the day and the 
fine artefacts which the Barbar mounds preserved, it is perhaps fortunate 
that Durand passed them by, though, as is evident from his notes, he did so 
with some regret. 

Durand did not, of course, know of the settlements lying beneath the 
mound near which the Qala'at al-Bahrain now stands. Excavators who came 
after him, notably the Danes who found and dug the site, have shown that 
settlements were established there from the last quarter of the third millennium, 
and developed into a substantial city by about the year 2000 BC. It is now 
generally accepted that the island's population was quite capable of providing 
sufficient inhabitants for the great necropoleis which pit the surface of Bahrain's 
northern and central deserts. We know now, in part at least, the answer to 
Durand's question 'If these miles upon miles of crowded heaps are tombs, 
where did the inhabitants live?' 

Durand's question, and his suspicion that Bahrain is an island of the dead, 
lead him again into another historical excursion which is full of entertainment, 
if it is a little thin on supportable fact. This time it is the Scythians in particular 
who attract him, with, again, a passing glance at the Phoenicians. 

Causes, such as their fertility, their temples(?), their abundance in most 
beautiful water, may have caused these islands to have been regarded 
as holy ground. 

Even at the present day the Hindoos look to be taken to the bosom 
of the Ganges, or the devout Mahomedan of these parts to be lain in 
the holy dust of Kerbela. May not some ancient tribe of Phoenicians on 
the mainland have looked to sleep their long sleep in the hallowed 

34 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

dust of these sacred islands? This may seem a far-fetched idea, but the 
vastness of the series of mounds must be my excuse. I have not heard 
of such another necropolis above ground in the world. 

With regard to the distance as likely to negative this idea, compare 
the distance that the tribes of Royal Scythians are said to have carried 
their Kings before they laid them finally to rest in their appointed places 
of sepulture on the Borysthenes in the land of the Gerri. 

The Thracians or Goths buried under tumuli, the Scythians, Lydians, 
and Libyans also, and indeed the custom appears to have been very 
generally adopted by the wandering Indo-European populations of 
the earth. 

With regard to the bones of animals found, compare the Scythian 
customs. These gentlemen, when Kings at any rate, had a pet wife, a 
pet horse and other valued possessions buried with them. This was 
hard on the wives and attendants, as also on the body of 50 handsome 
youths and horses who were killed, stuffed and staked round the tomb 
as a mortuary body-guard — a ghastly sight. 

Next Durand turns to speculations on the whereabouts of the great 
city of Gerrha, one of the most important emporia of late antiquity, 
located somewhere in eastern Arabia, to the west of the Bahrain islands. 
It is here that 'Dr. Anville' appears, suggesting that Gerrha might have 
been placed at 'Gram' (evidently a textual error for 'Grain', the early 
name for Kuwait). 

Durand's excursions into the intricacies of Arabian place-names are 
inventive if not wholly convincing; he manages, improbably, to bring 
back the Scythinans into the discussions by positing a connection between 
Gerrha and the 'land of the Gerrhi'. He acknowledges however 'mere 
resemblances (between 'the likeness of names') which are so common 
and unreliable'. 

To return, however, to Gerrha, as the first cause of these cemeteries, 
the correct site of which has been somewhat disputed, Dr. Anville would 
have placed it at Katif, Niebuhr at Koweit or Gram, and so on, but 
Forster places it, I think probably correctly, at the bottom of the bay 
behind Bahrain. Not content with his argument supported by Pliny and 
Strabo's accounts, whose descriptions, if they fail to apply here, will 
scarcely apply anywhere in the Gulf, Forster argues further that it is the 
received opinion that this country (the modern province of Haar or 
Bahrain) derived its scriptural name and primitive colonization from 
the Cushite Ftavileh. 

The Pison of Genesis enclosed this land, which was the name for 
the branch of the Euphrates, that ran parallel to the Gulf and fell into 
the Bahrain Islands. 

35 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

He contends that a direct proof of this region having borne the 
name of Havileh is supplied in Aval, a name retained for the larger 
island of Bahrain. 

Ptolemy places Gerrha at the bottom of this same bay, and it is the 
precise site assigned by Abul Feda Nasir Ettarsi, and Ulug Beg to the 
city of Hagar, said by Strabo to have been founded by Chaldean exiles. 

Forster says that the word Gerr'a is merely the anagram for Hagar, 
whose descendants he traces in the Agrai of the classics. 

He would make the land of Hagar the birth place of the Chaldeans, 
the sons of Khalid (Ben Khali), intimately connected with the Ishmaelites 
and the founders of Babylon. He traces Khaled, Hkalid, Hkanlah, Khait, 
Huale, Huile, Hanilah, Aval and Havileh, as mere verbal forms of the 
same root. 

The Chaldeans are, however, supposed to have had a Scythic or 
Turanian origin, and a large library and much study would be necessary 
before judging of the reliability of such derivations. 

Is it possible that the forms of burial of different races were distinct 
enough to give some clue, and that further researches amongst the 
wilderness of tom[b]s in good preservation here may throw some light 
into a dark page of history? 

I noticed above the Scythic customs of burials and transport of the 
dead to the land of the Gerrhi, to the point at which the Borysthenes 
becomes navigable. 

Is it possible that there should be any ethnic affinity, to account for 
the likeness of names between Gerrhus and Gerrha, or is it one of 
those mere resemblances which are so common and unreliable? 

Granting, however, that Gerrha was near here, what more likely 
than that these islands might have been used in the manner suggested 
above? 

I have been told by Arabs that there are many large ruins on the 
mainland, and one man in particular told me that they found traces of 
building, stone and pillars at a place where salt is quarried. The bottom 
of the Gulf behind Bahrain has, I believe, never been carefully explored. 

Durand's principal motive in visiting Bahrain was to investigate the island's 
immense fields of grave mounds which, in his day, were as the Gulf's sole 
relic of high antiquity of merit. In both versions Durand reports the opening 
of 'a small mound to the westward of the large group'. He inserts two small 
drawings in the report, respectively a plan and an elevation of the tomb. 
He then devotes a full page to a fine elevation and section drawing of one 
of the large mounds, the first such ever to be attempted (Fig 2.2). It is 
drawings of this quality and detail that make the reliance of archaeologists 
in the past on the edited Journal extracts, rather than the original report, 
somewhat to be regretted. 

36 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

His entry into one of the mounds is the opportunity, yet again, for Durand 
to wander off, this time into charming reminiscence about his apprehensions 
on disturbing the long-dead and the antics of a favoured 'very nice bull pup'. 
What his masters in the Viceroy's office in Calcutta thought of all this is not 
recorded. 

On creeping in under the huge slab above us I was sickened by a 
smell, which I cannot describe, and being new to the trade of body- 
snatching was assailed by some qualms of conscience as to the propriety 
of my conduct. On reflection, however, I came to the conclusion that 
the golden rule of life was, 'do unto others, &c' Applying this practically, 
and putting myself in the place of the defunct Phoenician, I thought 
that if I could think, under the circumstances, I should probably not 
mind being disturbed after being shut up for some thousands of years. 
So I went in bravely, 'Ce n'est que le premier pas,' and since then I 
have become hardened and keep several of the gentlemen's bones in 
a basket in my room. I was, however, disturbed, not to say distressed, 
at hearing them begin to rattle in the dark, but found on timid inspection 
that the noise proceeded from the intelligent researches of a very nice 
bull pup that I have. I remonstrated with him, as I thought that he 
might have drawn the line at such very innutritive substances, but the 
matter gave food for further reflection. I thought that such a subject 



. .... .11 * ..... i . .-. - 



ktat ■ ►>".. 




Figure 2.2 An elevation and section of a mound opened by Durand. 



37 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

might almost have supplied Montaigne with a text for one of his 
humorous philosophical essays, and that treated by Artemus Ward or 
Mark Twain, the Castor and Pollux of modern wit and humour, it might 
also become ludicrous. Reverting, however, to my previous argument, 
I returned to bed. 

Durand describes some of the material which he found in the mounds 
though, in the manner of most archaeologists of his day, very sketchily. 
However, he does refer to 'fragments of a vessel of coarse red earthenware'. 
This may well be the first record of the typical Barbar pottery which has been 
found in the Aali tombs and in the smaller tumuli of third millennium date. 
He goes on: 

In the small compartment facing the first we found the bones of some 
small animal, probably a gazelle or a sheep, and some remains of a rather 
delicate clay drinking vessel, whilst scattered here in the dust of the central 
passage were a lot of small shapeless pieces of oxidized metal, brass or 
copper, and some fragments of a vessel of coarse red earthenware. 

An intelligent Native remarked to me that these could no longer be 
made, as the colour of the earth had changed, he had found old bits 
before and always red, but now they can only make dirty white and 
light yellow. I suggested that age in the pots themselves might account 
for the change of colour, but he would not consent to the proposition. 

Of course the 'intelligent Native' was quite right; the pottery for which 
Aali is renowned today is a pale biscuit to buff colour and, like the earlier 
wares, will keep its colour to the end of time. Durand, incidentally prefers 
the very nineteenth-century term 'crockery' for pottery. It should be noted 
that excavations nearly a hundred years later produced a handsome suite of 
three examples of the 'rather delicate clay drinking vessel' to which Durand 
refers (Fig 7.12). 

Durand chose to describe in detail and to illustrate one of the large tumuli 
in both versions of his observations. In the report, however, he appends 
another of his small, marginal sketches and relates that 'he made use of my 
detachment of the 21st Native Infantry, working them in relays of a few men 
for a few hours, keeping them out of camp and of mischief. These were 
sepoys of the Indian Army who were evidently in attendance on Durand. 

Another drawing shows the mound (which he hoped 'might cover the 
ruins of a small temple') with steps cut in it from the top. From the report's 
description of Durand's penetration of this mound, the most detailed of any 
in either version, it is evident that he used gunpowder extensively, more 
than appears from the Journal extracts. In the report he notes, at one point: 

I picked my way along between these containing walls, removing the 
earth as I went, as also blowing down the mass of hard flint limestone, 

38 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

and concrete soil from above us, thus gradually filling up the passage 
behind us as we proceeded. 

In the Journal extracts this has become: 'I picked my way between these 
containing walls removing the earth as I went and then gradually clearing 
out the passage behind as we proceeded.' 

In both versions he goes on: 'This increased the labour enormously and 
was I believe unnecessary from the compactness of the mass, the relative 
small size of the gallery and the forward slope of the walls.' 

But the report continues: 

. . .which gave a good sound thrust to the arch we left over us; but not 
being an engineer I could not risk it, and once having blown in a 
portion of our roof, it was ipso facto necessary to continue to do so, as 
the earth was thoroughly loosened and weakened by the shock of this 
first explosion. The necessity, however, might have become more 
apparent when we came to the inner wall, for here gunpowder had to 
be used. 

It is the blocks in this passage which Durand draws so impressively. 

Towards the end of Durand's report, when he speaks of the mound which 
he would greatly have liked to excavate but now did not have the time, he 
provides another marginal drawing showing what he describes as 'original 
tombs'. A companion sketch shows the same mound 'present state 
exaggerated'. 

Durand's final comment is matter-of-fact: 'The whole subject may or may 
not be worth investigation'; and, in a note in the margin, he adds: 'It is 
astonishing that no scientific societies should have been sent out to examine 
these coasts, where the climate is so perfectly adapted to preserve every 
thing not attacked by man.' 

It is stranger still that ten years were to pass before Durand's initiative was 
to be matched by another intrepid traveller; the climate of the Bahrain islands 
and the Gulf generally, sadly, does not support Durand's contention that it 
preserves 'everything not attacked by man'. The exceptional summer humidity 
is almost as powerful an agent for destruction as man himself. 

Durand lived on to complete his life as a distinguished servant of the 
Crown; like his mentor, Rawlinson, he was honoured by his country: he too 
was created a baronet towards the end of his life. He returned to Britain with 
the trophies of his excursions to Bahrain, including the basalt stone with the 
precious inscription. It was not heard of for years. Then, in the 1970s, a sale 
of effects of one member of Durand's family was held by the London 
auctioneers, Christie's. An enquiry was put to them, for transmission to the 
family, if anything was known of the 'basalt' stone which Durand had brought 
back a century before. A member of the family recalled it; it had lain in their 

39 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

house in Scotland for many years before being moved to the family house in 
London. This, apparently, was destroyed by German bombing in the Second 
World War. The stone, presumably, lies buried still beneath the buildings 
now erected on the site. And yet — it is just possible that someone in those 
hectic days of the blitz recognized the stone as something unusual and 
removed it. Perhaps the expression of Rimum's piety still exists somewhere, 
even now. 

Durand died in 1920. He is credited with two other excursions into 
authorship, in addition to his seminal paper on Bahrain. One was on a subject 
not entirely distant from the Gulf, a life of Cyrus the Great King published in 
1906. The other smacks very much of its period and of the literary enterprises 
of imperial servants: its title was Rifle, Rod and Spear in the East. 

Durand's return to London from his visit to Bahrain was the occasion for 
a lecture to the members of the Royal Asiatic Society, in the rooms of Burlington 
House on an evening in the year 1880. The meeting was convened under 
the direction of the remarkable Henry Creswick Rawlinson. 

Rawlinson, a Major-General on the retired list, a Knight Commander of 
the Most Honourable Order of the Bath, a Baronet, Fellow of the Royal 
Society, President and Director of the Royal Asiatic Society, was one of those 
nineteenth-century Englishmen of extraordinary drive, enthusiasm and 
accomplishment in a variety of different vocations. As a young officer he had 
spent his furloughs amongst the wild tribes of Persia and in immersing himself 
in a bewildering variety of languages, ancient and modern. He had achieved 
a perilous celebrity by climbing the face of the great trilingual inscription of 
Behistun, the translation of which had led to the eventual decipherment of 
cuneiform and the unlocking of all the immeasurable riches of Sumerian and 
Babylonian literature, a process which continues to this day. Rawlinson was 
a considerable historian, with a range and grasp of the ebb and flow of 
events which would daunt any apprentice scholar in this age. In his later 
years, rich in honours and in accomplishments, he became one of the most 
visible luminaries in the London intellectual cosmos, forever researching, 
leaping into areas not penetrated by others, constantly encouraging younger 
scholars, though jealous of his own achievements and the recognition which 
they accorded him. 

As the author of Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia, in five folio volumes, 
he had had a profound influence on successive generations of historians and 
fledgeling practitioners of archaeology, the latter now emerging as a separate 
and discernible discipline. He knew the Gulf, at least from the Persian side, 
though there is no evidence that he had ever visited the Arabian littoral. Durand 
was fortunate that it was under Rawlinson's aegis at the Royal Asiatic Society 
that his discoveries in Bahrain could be launched on the intellectual London 
establishment, hovering on the brink of a new decade, the 1880s. 

Rawlinson's notes to Durand's report are, by any standards, a tour de 
force, though inevitably much of their scholarship would not be supported 

40 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

today. As much as any other consideration, too, the sheer enthusiasm and 
delight in his task, which seems to have possessed Rawlinson even in his 
eighth decade (he was 75 at the time when Durand's article was published in 
the Society's Journal), ring out of his text. This was the same quality of 
enthusiasm demonstrated by the great Sumerian god Enki, who was to be 
significant indeed in the early religions of the Gulf, when he was ordering 
the world, in one of these Sumerian myths of which Rawlinson was, as it 
were, one of the publishers to the modern age. Rawlinson demonstrates, in 
his notes to Durand's text, an ability to move with stunningly fluent ease 
from language to language, ancient and modern. Naturally he was immersed 
in the classics, the common currency of the educated man in the nineteenth, 
as in earlier centuries. Arabic, Persian and Hebrew are fluently commanded 
and that command extends to Assyrian, Babylonian and, though he does not 
use the term, the most ancient of all literary sources, Sumerian, of which he 
was one of the original translators. 

Rawlinson sets Durand's comments into context by summarizing what 
was known, at that point, of the Gulf in antiquity. He begins with the story 
recorded by the Hellenistic writer Berossus in his great lost work, 
Baby loniaca, 5 the legend of the fish-man Oannes and his followers, swimming 
up the Gulf and bringing the arts of civilization to Mesopotamia. He accords 
the primacy of city establishment to Eridu, a fact supported by Sumerian 
belief and by archaeology; Eridu is Enki's city and the most ancient urban 
foundation in Mesopotamia. 

Rawlinson occasionally has the most remarkable insights. Thus he attributes 
the origins of commerce to the early inhabitants of the Gulf, a perception 
which has largely been confirmed by more recent researches. His supreme 
achievement, in the present context, is his identification of the ancient 
paradisial land of the early texts, transliterated as Dilmun, with Bahrain. 
Before Rawlinson's attribution, this name, first used by the Sumerians 5,000 
years ago, had not been in common currency for millennia. 

Rawlinson was remarkably prescient in some of his opinions. His belief 
that the Gulf spread over a wider area of land surface in the past than it 
does today (though he was probably thinking mainly of the Tigris- 
Euphrates basin where the rivers debouch) has been borne out in studies 
of the shorelines of the Lower Gulf. As we know now, the sea in ancient 
times ran into the region known today as the Rub al-Khali and parts of 
the Gulf coast, as it is now, as well as much of eastern Arabia, were under 
water. 

But no doubt much of what Rawlinson proposes looks fairly odd today. 
His mixture of philology, speculation and myth would make him an uneasy 
colleague for most modern scholars. He transliterates the cuneiform characters 
which spell the island's name, NiTuk*', a term which for a long time was used 
as an alternative to Dilmun. In fact cuneiform characters often have different 
values and the form NiTuk*' ('ki' is a determinative for land' or 'mountain' 

41 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

and as such was not pronounced) is properly transliterated 'Dilmun'; it may 
have other values also. 

Rawlinson writes well of the island of Icarus in the northern part of the 
Gulf; he did not know that Alexander's interest in the region which he records 
would be proved so notably by the discovery of the Alexander inscription 
(see Chapter 8) on Failaka island, which is now known to have been called 
Icarus in Hellenistic times. This island, in the Bay of Kuwait, also revealed 
considerable early second-millennium remains. 

Rawlinson ranges cheerfully into Levantine studies, into cosmological 
speculation and star-lore. The distant Egyptians are grist to his mill and he, 
like others after him, speculates on the similarity of place-names in the Gulf 
and of cities on the eastern Mediterranean coast. He wonders at the possibility 
of the population movement on a large scale from the Gulf to the 
Mediterranean, though he does not feel, expressing a relatively sophisticated, 
indeed a quite modern view, that the mere coincidence of names is at all 
convincing. Anyone familiar with the similarity of place-names throughout 
the Arabic-speaking world today will agree with him. 

Though he writes forcefully, even sometimes peremptorily (as befits, 
perhaps, a Victorian Major-General), he can mock himself in a most engaging 
manner. Thus, in writing of the identification of the planet Mercury with 
Dilmun (through Mercury's counterpart in Mesopotamian stellar myths, the 
god Nebo, and that divinity's involvement with the art of writing), he notes: 
A dissertation of some extent, if not of much interest, on Nebo's connexion 
with writing and learning will be found in my essay "On the Religion of the 
Babylonians and Assyrians".' An agreeable man, evidently. 

Rawlinson's review of Durand's paper is highly allusive. He touches on 
ideas associated with the ancient Gulf, such as the fish-cults of Mesopotamia, 
for example, which have hardly been considered by later scholarship. He 
was a most creative antiquarian of profound scholarship and boundless 
interests. Above all, he was one of the first men who recalled Dilmun to the 
modern world and, through his analysis of Durand's notes, to the world of 
scholarship. In many ways Rawlinson's notes are the most significant 
contribution to Bahrain studies published anywhere until Danish 
archaeologists began their years of excavations in the 1950s. 

The final note of Rawlinson's extraordinary and wide-ranging 
observations reminds us that two great institutions indicated their willingness 
to support future work in Bahrain, so impressed were they by Durand and, 
no doubt, by Rawlinson's review of his work. The British Museum, whose 
contribution to archaeology is unequalled, offered ±100 for experimental 
excavation on the island. The Government of India had earlier offered a 
similar sum. Neither grant was, apparently, ever invoked by scholars 
interested in excavating in Bahrain, but Rawlinson's last words have the 
ring of prophecy about them: 'But the search, though suspended, has not 
been abandoned and important results may yet be looked for.' Those results 

42 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

were to come nearly a century after the words were written and were, 
indeed, important. 

Ten years passed from Durand's visit. Queen Victoria held her Golden 
Jubilee, Disraeli was dead, Gladstone formed his last administration; the 
Gulf slumbered, its inhabitants getting on with the cultivation of the date 
palm plantations and the harvesting of pearls. 

The next visitors to record their impressions of Bahrain and its antiquities 
were a husband-and-wife team of explorer-writers, Mr and Mrs J.Theodore 
Bent. 6 They represented a familiar phenomenon of the nineteenth century, 
very notable before the onset of visual media, the travel writers who wandered 
across the world recording their impressions of the life of peoples to whom 
the rise of the empire had given access. 

The Bents arrived in Bahrain in 1889, equipped with cameras and 
some basic excavation techniques. During their stay they opened several 
of the grave mounds and recovered from them ivory, pottery and metal 
objects, of which the ivory was quite notable and served further to 
confirm the wholly erroneous belief that the mounds were Phoenician 
in origin. 

Bent presented his findings to a meeting of the Royal Geographical Society 
on 25 November 1889, at the Society's rooms in Lowther House, Kensington. 
His talk was illustrated with slides taken from the photographs which they 
had secured during their stay. These are amongst the earliest recorded in 
Bahrain and are of some quality: in one of them Bent, looking like a 
gamekeeper who has strayed rather far from his customary beat, clad in 
deerstalker hat and tweeds, is revealed entertaining Bahraini dignitaries at 
the Aali mounds. 

His paper is well structured and quite vivid in the impression which it 
gives of Bahrain; Bent was, after all, a professional. Many of his early 
comments, it will be evident, are drawn, largely unacknowledged, from 
Durand's extracts and Rawlinson's comments of ten years earlier. His own 
observation is sometimes slightly out of focus: thus he says that 'the merchants 
dwell in towers of certain architectural merit.' This is a reference evidently to 
the wind towers which were so typical a feature of domestic dwellings of the 
more substantial kind throughout the Gulf and eastern Arabia until the very 
recent past. The architecture he describes as 'strictly Saracenic', whatever 
that means. 

Bent usefully summarizes the history of the region, with tolerable accuracy, 
from the sixteenth century, when the Portuguese landed. He is quite reliable 
on the ethnography of Bahrain in the late nineteenth century. 

Although the stated purpose of the Bents' visit was to investigate the 
mounds, his paper deals with their excavation rather summarily. Like Durand, 
he and his wife concentrated on the Aali mounds, the most impressive in 
size of all the tumuli on the main island. The tombs which they opened are 
described concisely and the contents, such as they were, briefly reviewed. 

43 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

The material which they cleared from the tombs was handed over to the 
British Museum, where it remains. 

In the discussion following Bent's paper, the happily named Admiral 
Lindsay Brine leapt to the defence of the Bahrainis' appearance, on which 
Bent was undeservedly harsh. Mr Cecil Smith reiterated the possibility of 
Phoenician origins in the Gulf and, as he represented the British Museum, 
gave it some canonical authority. His suggestion, that the Egyptian term for 
the land of Punt, To-Nefer', might mean 'the holy island' was especially 
interesting and deserved to be considered further. 

The President wound up the meeting with what sounds suspiciously like 
faint praise of the Bents' journey, remarking that 'it proved that it was not 
necessary for a traveller who deserved to give the Society valuable information 
to go in all cases very far from the ordinary routes of commerce.' 

In the years after his Bahrain enterprise Bent went on to do other valuable 
work, including a review of the ruins of Great Zimbabwe, an investigation of 
Axum in Ethiopia and travels in southern Arabia and the Red Sea. Another 
decade passed and Bent was dead, a victim of that scourge of western travellers 
in the East, malarial fever. His widow, however, who had accompanied him 
on his Arabian journeys, published in 1900 Southern Arabia, a popular record 
of their travels in Bahrain, Oman and the Yemen. 7 Mrs Bent's literary style, 
where her own hand is to be detected, is not generally to be commended, 
though she does manage to record the occasional illuminating titbit of 
information about life in Bahrain at the turn of the century. Thus paragraphs 
from her first chapter, describing Shaikh Isa bin Ali, the Ruler of Bahrain who 
brought a substantial degree of progress and stability to the state, will serve 
to show her at her best. 

We went to see him at Moharek, where he holds his court in the winter- 
time. We crossed over in a small baggala, and had to be poled for a 
great distance with our keel perpetually grating on the bottom. It was 
like driving in a carriage on a jolting road; the donkeys trotted 
independently across, their legs quite covered with water. We were 
glad when they came alongside, and we completed our journeys on 
their backs. 

The courtyard of the palace, which somewhat recalls the Alhambra 
in its architecture, was, when we arrived, crowded with Arab chiefs in 
all manner of quaint costumes. His Majesty's dress was exceedingly 
fine. He and his family are entitled to wear their camel-hair bands 
bound round with gold thread. These looked very regal over the red 
turban, and his long black coat, with his silver-studded sword by his 
side, made him look every inch a king. 

The introduction to her second chapter, 'The mounds of Ali', shows her to 
less advantage, though in a declamatory posture no doubt typical of the 
time. 

44 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

And now behold us excavators on the way to the scene of our labours. 
Six camels conveyed our tents, a seventh carried goat-skins full of water. 
Four asses groaned under our personal effects; hens for consumption 
rode in a sort of lobster-pot by the side of clattering pickaxes and 
chairs; six policemen, or peons, were in our train, each on a donkey. 
One carried a paraffin lamp, another a basket of eggs on the palm of 
his hand, and as there were no reins and no stirrups, the wonder is that 
these articles ever survived. As for ourselves, we, like everybody else, 
rode sideways, holding on like grim death before and behind, especially 
when the frisky Bahrein donkeys galloped at steeplechase pace across 
the desert. 

'Southern Arabia', though suffering somewhat from Mrs Bent's effusive 
style, is valuable for the descriptions it contains, not only of Bahrain but also 
of Oman. In the case of the latter, it describes the landscape of Dhofar, one 
of the earliest descriptions to survive from a writer with an archaeological 
interest. Her descriptions of 'ruins', however, are imprecise, though it would 
appear that she and her husband visited the site of Sumharam, or Khor Rori. 

These two records, Durand's and the Bents', of late Victorian excursions 
to what must have seemed a very distant and remote outpost of empire, 
were to set the scene for the archaeology of the region for many decades. 
For many years little interest was taken by foreigners; the British discouraged 
most of them, in any case, from penetrating a part of the world they were 
disposed to keep as far as possible to themselves. In consequence the earliest 
reports of an archaeological significance, as distinct from the records of 
travellers to the region or the occasional explorer on his way to more remote 
climes still, tend to focus on Bahrain to the exclusion of the rest of the Gulf. 
This situation persisted up to the 1930s, when the search for oil brought 
more people with leisure and relevant professional skills to the Arabian 
peninsula. The isolation of the Gulf and indeed of the peninsula itself from 
contact with scientific or academic interests, is, of course, the reason for the 
absence, otherwise inexplicable, of any reference to Arabia in works of 
historical or archaeological reference up to very recent times. 

At the time of the publication of Durand's extracts in the Royal Asiatic 
Society' s Journal both the Government of India and the British Museum had 
each, as we have seen, made available the sum of £100 for further research 
into the antiquity of the Bahrain island. No one, evidently, took advantage of 
these generous allocations at the time. 

In 1904, however, something must have pricked the interest of the 
Government of India in renewing work in Bahrain, for we are told that in 
that year 'the Archaeological Department of the Government of India turned 
their attention to this ancient site, the Director General himself proposing to 
visit Bahrain with a view to settling if possible, the question of the origin of 
the necropolis.' These words were written by the next figure on the Gulf's 

45 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

archaeological scene, the incumbent Political Resident himself, Colonel 
F.B.Prideaux. 

Colonel Prideaux's report, published in the Archaeological Survey of India, 
1908-9, 8 is by far the most professional work of its kind to be published up 
to that point. Like others before and after him, Prideaux lifts observations 
from Durand's Journal article without acknowledgement, but he adds 
considerably to our knowledge about the immediate pre-Islamic period and 
the early Islamic centuries when Bahrain had acknowledged Islam, apostasized 
and then, again and finally, elected for the Faith. 

For these times, generally obscure in the Gulfs history, he relies on Yaqut's 
Mu'jam-al-Buldan . He quotes, amongst others, as the origin of the name al- 
Bahrain ('the two seas'), the idea that it refers, on the one hand, to 'Buhaira', 
little sea, which received the surplus waters of the Hasa Springs (the great 
oasis on the mainland to the west of Bahrain) 'on the edge of the Oasis, and 
on the other hand to the Persian Gulf. 

Prideaux was a competent Arabist and he comments intelligently on the 
problem, which had perplexed some of his predecessors, of the similarities 
of the names of Bahrain with those in other, more distant, lands. He also 
provides a gazetteer of the names of villages and towns given by Yaqut as 
being in Bahrain and on the coast of eastern Arabia, and identifies them with 
sites of his own day. He also speculates, with considerable perception, that 
the ruin now known as the Qala'at al-Bahrain may conceal Babylonian levels. 
It does, and others earlier still. 

But it is of course principally the grave mounds which attract Prideaux's 
eye. He writes of them sparely and with commendable precision. This is 
really the first report on the island's antiquities which can be considered as a 
scientific work. 

In all, Prideaux examined sixty-seven of the mounds (Fig. 2.3). He made 
a number of minor but worthwhile finds, including more ivory. His 
photographs are clear and helpful, particularly for the collection of pottery 
which he is the first actually to record. He includes a map of the principal 
Aali mounds, which was frequently to be reprinted, and in it he identifies 
both the mounds opened by Durand and those on which the Bents had 
worked (Fig. 2.4). His map of the region shows the Eastern Province of 
Arabia, then largely divided amongst the various tribes of the Hasa, as 'Bahrain'. 
It was certainly not so called in his time but, unwittingly, it indicates the 
probable extent of the old Dilmun community of the third millennium BC. 

It must be suspected that the Indian typesetters in Calcutta had some 
trouble with the Colonel's manuscript, as was similarly the case with Durand's 
text more than twenty years earlier. Thus in the third paragraph of the 
introductory notes on 'History' a reference, in parentheses, is made to 
'(Pihlical Ophir?)': presumably 'Biblical' is meant: throughout his text such 
vagaries appear and it is difficult to believe that he would have tolerated 
them for a moment had he been aware of them. Prideaux's report is 

46 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 




Figure 2.3 The burial mounds, photographed by Prideaux. 



remarkable for the tone of deep exasperation in which much of it is written. 
He complains bitterly and frequently about the cost of excavation and of the 
excessive demands of his workforce. 

Altogether Prideaux's report marks the real beginning of controlled 
observation of the Bahrain tumuli. The whereabouts of Prideaux's excavated 
material is now unknown, though it has been suggested that some of it may 
still be in India. 

In 1925 a young archaeologist, Ernest Mackay, was directed to visit Bahrain 
by Sir Flinders Petrie and to examine the mounds. Petrie was a man of 
boundless energy, a genius at synthesizing evidence, much given to fearless 
and highly creative speculation. In 1914 he had earlier, in 1914, tried to 
interest T.E.Lawrence, another young archaeologist then working in the Levant 
and with Petrie in Egypt, in excavating in Bahrain on behalf of the British 
School. Writing to his friend D.G.Hogarth in February 1912 Lawrence relates 

Prof. Petrie spoke to me two or three times in Egypt about the Persian 
Gulf and S. Arabia. He told me Bent had dug ivories (early) in Bahrain 
— and when we found some very curious Mesopotamian — like bull's 
legs on prehistoric beds (one I hope goes to Oxford — really good things) 
he declared that he believed the early dynasties came round by sea 
from Elam or thereabout to Egypt; and that Bahrain was a stage of their 



47 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

going. Finally in my last week with him he suggested my going down 
there to dig, say next year, as a preliminary season, to be followed by 
a second on a larger scale, if it seemed promising. He said he could 
provide the funds. 

I told him I'd ask you about it. . .. I would like to dig in the Persian 
Gulf, and as Bahrain is nominally British, I suppose we might carry off 
the stuff. It all depends on what Bent found. 9 

Nothing came of this proposal and Lawrence was diverted towards other 
preoccupations; in the process he was handed over to history, even to legend. 
Archaeology concerned him no more. 

In the midst of all his other labours, Petrie found time to publish a 
remarkable magazine, Ancient Egypt. One number, produced during the 
Great War, dealt with the evidence of Mesopotamian influence or connections 
in late Predynastic Egypt. Writing on the art of the period Petrie observes: 

The strong Mesopotamian suggestions of the designs have, as we noted 
before, no exact parallels in the East. They seem rather to belong to a 
people of Elamite or Tigrian origin and ideas, who had progressed on 
their own lines. The presence of shipping as an important factor would 



E't.AN 47 MCUHOS 



"-•■;. 'AL 



' • . ■■ JLl 



•■ 



"* 



■ H 






;---r- 






; -^ ® 



Figure 2.4 Prideaux's map of the Aali grave mounds — the 'Royal Tombs'. 

48 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

be against their having come to Egypt across the Arabian desert. The 
probability seems that they had branched off to some settlement in the 
Persian Gulf (such as the Bahreyn Islands) or on the South Arabian 
coast, and from their second home brought its style and ideas into 

Egypt. 10 

It is not clear what planted this idea in Petrie's mind, nor do we know 
what he knew of the 'Bahreyn Islands' that led him to this remarkable 
perception. But he returned to it again, in The Making of Egypt, published 
just before the Second World War, in 1939- The book is an extraordinary 
melange of information, culled from nearly sixty years of work in the Nile 
Valley; it attempts to explain what went into the creation of the society which 
emerged around the end of the fourth millennium BC (though Petrie believed 
the date to be earlier) and which led to the splendours of the Egyptian kingship, 
marked by the long succession of the dynasties. In the course of a chapter 
entitled 'The Dynastic people', Petrie develops his concept of an invasion 
from the east, as one of the essential elements in the development of the 
distinctive culture which was to flourish for so long. 

The distinctive character of the 1st Dynasty, which separates it from all that 
went before, is the conquest and union of the whole land of Egypt. It 
became thus subject to the falcon-bearing tribe of Horus, which was the 
natural enemy of the Aumu, the Set-bearing tribe. This falcon tribe had 
certainly originated in Elam, as indicated by the hero and lions on the Araq 
Knife handle XXXXV. They went down the Persian Gulf and settled in the 
'Horn of Africa'. There they named the 'Land of Punt', sacred to later 
Egyptians as the source of the race. ... Those who went up the Red Sea 
formed the dynastic invaders of Egypt, entering by the Qoceir-Koptos 
road. Others went on to Syria and founded Tyre, Sidon and Aradus named 
after their home islands in the Persian Gulf (Strabo XVI, iii, 4). rl 

It is now generally accepted that there are distinct traces of Mesopotamian 
influence in the late Predynastic cultures of Egypt, though how these were 
transmitted in the Nile Valley is not clear. Certainly one possibility is that 
merchants, or at any rate seafarers who used or knew of Mesopotamian 
boats, reached Egypt from the Red Sea. This is suggested particularly by the 
rock carvings of such boats in the eastern Egyptian desert and by their 
appearance on works of art of late Predynastic times. However, a route 
overland, crossing the Arabian peninsula, is also a possibility. 

Ernest Mackay was Petrie's later nominee and substitute for Lawrence in 
exploring the antiquity of Bahrain. He had worked in Palestinian archaeology 
in the years immediately after the Great War and was later to make a 
considerable name in India, where he instituted a programme of 
archaeological activity, inherited and extensively developed subsequently 

49 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

by the late Sir Mortimer Wheeler, who was himself to play a small part in the 
later history of the archaeology of Bahrain. 

Mackay's work in India was eventually to have considerable pertinence 
to the understanding of the past of the Gulf and, in particular, of Bahrain. As 
the evidence unearthed by the Danes at the Qala'at al-Bahrain in the 1950s 
and 1960s came to be examined, it was evident that close affinities existed 
between Bahrain and the Indus Valley cities, the result of the Gulf's far- 
ranging trade in the third millennium BC. In 1925, Mackay set out for Bahrain 
to ascertain 'the nature of the tombs and their contents' . His report is published 
in the series instituted by the Egypt Exploration Society, which was founded 
by the remarkable Amelia Edwards, author of One Thousand Miles up the 
Nile, a minor masterpiece of archaeological and travel literature. The Society 
which she founded maintained a policy of swift and detailed publication of 
its expeditions; to this procedure Mackay responded readily. 

The volume in which his report appears is entitled Bahrein andHamamieh; 
it is uncommonly rare. 12 Hamamieh is a mixed Predynastic and later Egyptian 
site, which is reported in the same volume. Presumably it was decided by 
the editors that Bahrain alone did not warrant its own volume (Hamamieh, 
incidentally, is notable in Egyptian archaeology in that it is the only stratified 
Predynastic site yet published). 

Mackay's report is a careful and expert summary of his work. He describes 
briefly that of his predecessors and then proceeds straight into a detailed 
description of the mounds. He is really the first person to analyse professionally 
the different methods of construction which Bahrain's tumuli reveal. 

Although he was most careful about his work, Mackay went somewhat 
off-course in some of his conclusions. He thought that Bahrain could not 
have supported so large a population as the fields of mounds imply and that 
most of the burials were brought to the island, though he knew of the existence 
of similar mounds on the Arabian mainland. He does not commit himself to 
the matter of the Phoenician provenance of the burials, contenting himself 
with repeating the British Museum's assertion that the material shown to that 
institution by Bent proved the Phoenician origins of the tombs and their 
occupants. 

He did, however, deliver himself of one firm opinion, to the effect that, 
despite the admirable quality of its dates, Bahrain could not be Dilmun. This, 
he says, is proved since the ancient records show that copper was to be 
found in Dilmun; he did not apparently understand the island's role as an 
entrepot, though some of his predecessors seemed to have had an inkling 
that this was part of Dilmun-Bahrain's story. In the work of later scholars the 
copper trade is recognized as a profoundly important element in Bahrain's 
history and in its identification with Dilmun. 

Mackay's illustrations are excellent and he is the first to give careful plans 
of the tombs and their construction. He includes a page of pottery drawings, 
though he does not show any vessels that can be recognized as the third- 

50 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

millennium wares distinctive to Bahrain and known as 'Barbar' and 'chain- 
ridge' wares. He uses Prideaux's map and acknowledges his debt to his 
report very properly. 

Shortly after Mackay's visit to Bahrain there appeared what is perhaps the 
most singular of the documents in the record of the progress of archaeology 
in Bahrain over the past century: Bahrain, Tilmun, Paradise, published in 
1928 in the august papers of the Biblical Pontifical Institute of Rome. 13 Its 
author was a Jesuit, remarkable in his erudition even for that learned body of 
subtle scholars and propagandists for the Roman faith. His name was Edward 
Burrows. 

Burrows worked on several of the excavations carried out by British and 
other teams in the south of Iraq, in the land which had been Sumer. He was 
present at the epoch-making excavations of Sir Leonard Woolley at Ur; he 
was responsible for the deciphering of a number of the early texts, preserved 
on the familiar baked clay tablets of the archives of the city-states in the Land 
of the Two Rivers. 

It was presumably in the course of this work that Burrows' interest in the 
Sumerian Paradise Land was stimulated. Several scholars, including German 
and American specialists in ancient texts had identified references to Dilmun 
(or, in the Semitic form of the name, Tilmun) in them. These had prompted 
some diverse speculations about the nature of this archetypal Holy Land, its 
origins and even the origins of the Sumerian people themselves. 

Burrows' interest might be expected to be engaged on two scores: on the 
one hand, his scholarly concern as an epigrapher and philologist, who would 
quite properly analyse a place-name from the ancient texts; on the other, the 
Christian priest who might, however uneasily, recognize the source of some 
of the powerful myths that he was himself concerned to promote in the 
discharge of his sacerdotal functions. 

At all events Burrows approached the study of the paradisial nature of 
Dilmun-Bahrain and the meaning that might be concealed with its name, 
with committed and persistent application, even, it might be said, with an 
attention approaching the obsessive. Obsessionality, too, seems to be 
demonstrated in the actual presentation of the Burrows' paper, for every 
word, including the references in all the several languages in which Burrows 
was supremely competent, is written by hand with differing forms of 
epigraphy denoting italic or other variations. He also uses different-coloured 
inks for still greater distinction or emphasis. Burrows was an ingenious and 
patient cleric; he produced a report which, though it may be considered 
distinctly odd, yet deserves to be remembered. If for no other reason, its 
concern with the etymology of the name 'Dilmun' (which is still unsolved) 
may repay study. 

Essentially, Burrows' concern is to penetrate the meaning of the ancient 
name of Bahrain. He begins, logically enough, with the Sumerian version, 
pointing out that the cuneiform characters NiTuk (with ki added as an 

51 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

unarticulated determinative to demonstrate that the word is the name of a 
country) can also spell Dilmun. He notes that Tilmun is frequently identified 
as a source of dates. (He tends to use the Semiticized 7ilmun more frequently 
than the Sumerian .Dilmun.) Then he suggests that NiTuk could also be 
pronounced 'Dugud' in Sumerian. He proposed that the signs have the 
meanings 'terrible' or 'majestic' and, in the case of Dugud, 'great one'. He 
believed that Dugud would be an appropriate name for a sacred island like 
Dilmun: in this context it would suggest 'venerable', to which he would add 
the nuance 'dark', relating this in turn to the name of Bahrain's central massif, 
the Jebel Dukhan, the Mountain of Smoke, the name by which it is still 
known. 

With the surefootedness of an ibex or a mountain goat he leaps from 
linguistic rock to rock, ranging across a dazzling selection of ancient tongues. 
He even identifies Dilmun-Bahrain's concern with the smelting of copper, 
linking that trade in antiquity with Bahrain's and eastern Arabia's later 
reputation for the manufacture and export of brass and copper goods. 

One piece of negative evidence is particularly telling in his criticism. 
Burrows remarks that one objection which might be advanced against the 
equation Bahrain=Dilmun was the absence of any connection with pearls in 
ancient times. He notes that there had been an attempt to derive NiTtuk from 
a word for 'pearl' in Old Turkish and Hungarian, but this he dismisses as he 
is unaware of any connection between the Gulf island and the trade in pearls. 
Later archaeology has proved such a trade to have been flourishing in Bahrain 
and eastern Arabia for at least 5,000 years. 

He plunges into the Epic of Gilgamesh, breasting the glittering 
phosphorescent seas around Bahrain and identifying Siduri's magic garden 
and its jewel trees (see Chapter 10) with the glow which the 
phosphorescence gives. He locates Siduri's isle in the Gulf and reminds us 
that ultimately she became the Erythraean Sibyl and, more remarkable still, 
the daughter of Berossos. He was the Chaldaean historian of the Seleucid 
King Antiochos' time, who recorded the story of Oannes, the strange 
amphibian creature, part-man, part-fish, that brought the arts of mankind 
to the ancestors of the Sumerians and each night returned to the waters of 
the Gulf. 

Hebrew and Arabic are at Burrows' command and he researches skilfully 
amongst the Arab geographers for support of his attributions. He brings all 
this evidence together in a splendid coda in which he identifies Tilmun, 
Bahrain and Paradise. The land is Enki's garden. 

The meaning of the island's name has always perplexed and intrigued 
scholars. 'Bahrain' itself means 'the two seas': an episode in the Quran 
involving Moses and the mysterious figure El Khidr is stated to occur at the 
place of 'the two seas' (see Chapter 10). Earlier commentators assumed that 
this meant the vicinity of Suez where the Red Sea and the Mediterranean 
come into close proximity. Nowadays, however, most opinion places the 

52 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

meeting in the Gulf and agrees that 'the two seas' are the salt waters and the 
sweet, the latter bubbling so surprisingly out of the very seabed, to the north 
of the Bahrain islands. 

Some commentators have suggested that Dilmun in its Sumerian form 
(NiTuk) means, almost unbelievably, 'the place of the bringing of oil', 14 a 
name which was certainly justified after oil had indeed been discovered in 
Bahrain in 1932; Deimer, a distinguished German scholar, writing in the 
1920s, proposed that in archaic times the ideogram NiTuk meant 'oil-ship'. 15 
The oil to which this refers is, of course, bitumen, the surface deposits of 
which were well known to the Sumerians. Bitumen has, indeed, a modern 
part to play in the development of the Gulf's archaeology. 

Not all scholars would go all the way with Burrows today. But one thing 
is certain: the work which he so painstakingly initiated and in which few 
scholars would have either the application or the skills to follow him, would 
certainly repay revision and a fresh view. 

The last of the archaeologists who preceded the Danish expeditions of 
the 1950s onwards, was a young American scholar, Peter Bruce Cornwall. 
'On the location of Dilmun' was published in October 1946. l6 This article, 
though it is quite short, neatly summarizes much of the work of earlier scholars, 
pulls it together and presents the whole as a convincing demonstration of 
the equation that Bahrain equals ancient Dilmun. 

Cornwall visited Bahrain and the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia in 
the winter of 1940-1. His contribution to Dilmun studies was to be 
considerable. He excavated extensively in the islands — and to a more limited 
extent on the mainland — and uncovered some telling evidence. Most 
remarkable perhaps was an enigmatic structure which he discovered in 
Manama and illustrated in his article, which he suggested might represent 
a council chamber, probably of pre-Islamic date. It was found below street 
level in the town and is now lost. 

Cornwall had, some years before the publication of the BASOR article, 
submitted a doctoral thesis to Harvard University entitled 'The history of 
Bahrain before Cyrus'. 17 Evidently, he expected his thesis to be published; 
unhappily for the wider promulgation of Bahrain's ancient importance, it 
never was. It is a remarkable and perceptive synthesis of all the historical 
and textual references to Dilmun in the ancient sources, with a careful analysis 
of the evidence; in its extent and sensitivity it has hardly been bettered. It 
remains a mine of fascinating and significant material for the assiduous 
Dilmunologist. 

Cornwall's article of 1946 was written in reply to one published by the 
distinguished American Sumerologist, Samuel Noah Kramer, who, almost 
alone amongst his colleagues, stood out against the acceptance of the 
identification of Bahrain and Dilmun. 18 In later years Kramer remained silent 
on this question and most authorities would consider that Cornwall provides 
a convincing counter to his arguments. 

53 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Cornwall made another important contribution to Dilmun studies when 
he published two letters from a Kassite official based, in all probability, on 
the mainland, to his colleague in Babylon. 19 He complains about the 
depredations of the Amorite nomads on the dates waiting shipment back to 
Babylon. He also refers to a mysterious woman, in Cornwall's view perhaps 
a Sutean priestess, who had crossed over from the mainland to Bahrain (see 
Chapter 7). 

Cornwall brings Dilmun-Bahrain into a clear association with Sumer. 
Though it is a small matter, his discovery in some of the mounds of hairpins 
of the type with which the Sumerians used to fix their characteristic buns, 
gives special life to his evidence. He is wrong in two particulars of chronology: 
the Durand stone dates to the early centuries of the second millennium and 
the grave mounds fall broadly into two periods, the second half of the third 
millennium to the early part of the second and the closing centuries of the 
first millennium BC. 

The Second World War was not a propitious time for any sort of serious 
archaeological work to be carried out in so remote a theatre as the Arabian 
Gulf. The importance of the Gulf, however, came increasingly to be 
recognized as the Powers realized their dependence upon sources of supply 
of petroleum for industry and the machines of war. Bahrain, to its surprise, 
was bombed by the Italians, presumably by mistake, but it could not be 
said that the war greatly affected life in the region as a whole. However, its 
future importance was being determined in those days and its people were, 
unknown to themselves, shortly to experience an astonishing transformation 
of their lives as the focus of world energy needs swung towards the Arabian 
deserts. 

In 1953, some seventy years of occasional and fragmentary research came 
to an end with the true beginning of serious archaeology in the Gulf. Such 
work as there had been up to that point was largely the consequence of 
individual initiative, essentially spasmodic and largely uncoordinated. Despite 
the attention which the various reports of work carried out, especially in 
Bahrain, had gained, rather surprisingly they led to no planned or sustained 
programmes by serious institutions. But in 1953 the first Danish Expedition 
arrived in Bahrain and began work. Over the next seventeen years they 
were to transform the state of knowledge of the Gulf's antiquity and to recall 
to the world a civilization which had been forgotten for millennia. 20 

The story of the Danish Expedition has been agreeably told by Geoffrey 
Bibby in his popular book Looking for Dilmun. 21 Bibby — and the 
expedition's original leader, P. V. Glob — deserve to be remembered not only 
as notable originators and the men largely to be credited with recalling to 
the world a forgotten and important part of its heritage, but also as amongst 
the century's most fortunate archaeologists: luck is a quality, in archaeology 
at least, as important as technical competence. Between them and their 
colleagues they wrote a new chapter in the world's history and showed 

54 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

that 4,000 years and more ago a civilization flourished in the Gulf which 
bore comparison with its great contemporaries in Mesopotamia, Egypt, 
Iran and the Indus Valley. 

The way in which the Danes first received permission to work in Bahrain 
demonstrates the importance of having fortunate stars to guide the destinies 
of archaeologists. The British adviser to the Ruler of Bahrain, Sir Charles 
Belgrave, a man of some modest scholarly interests but with little experience 
of archaeologists, received, to his evident surprise, two applications for 
permission to excavate Bahrain's antiquities in the same week: one was 
from the Danish Expedition based at the University of Aarhus at Moesgaard 
in the north of Jutland, the other from the considerably more influential 
and very much richer University of Pennsylvania. Feeling himself unable 
to make an informed judgement as to the professional merits of either 
bidder, Belgrave decided that the most equitable means of reaching a 
decision would be on the toss of a coin. The coin was tossed and Denmark 
was free to resume an association with the Gulf which had begun with an 
expedition some 200 years before undertaken, under quite appalling 
circumstances, by a team sent to explore the peninsula by the Danish king, 
Frederick, and of which only a young naval officer, Carsten Niebhur, 
survived. Of such random circumstances is archaeological history made, 
but it is difficult not to wonder what the much more richly endowed 
Pennsylvanians might have made of it. 22 

In the past twenty years it is particularly the contribution of the various 
Departments of Antiquities, established by the various governments in the 
region, which has transformed both the nature and extent of Arabian 
archaeology. At the same time, also, there has been an increasing awareness 
by the governments which have charge of this part of the world's heritage, 
of the importance of what is in their keeping. Most of the states have 
established Departments of Antiquities and have introduced laws protecting 
archaeological and historic sites both from uncontrolled development and 
from plunder. 

An achievement of several of the states is the creation of learned journals 
charting the progress of the scholarship of the past in the country concerned. 
Two in particular should be noted: first, Atlal, the Journal of Saudi Arabian 
Archaeology, which has been published regularly since 1977 and which has 
recorded the progress of the very remarkable land survey of the Kingdom 
undertaken from 1976 onwards. 23 In the course of the survey an immense 
catalogue of sites has been compiled from every part of the kingdom, which 
must be one of the most inhospitable for such work as well as having been 
amongst the largest unsurveyed areas of the ancient world, until the Saudi 
Department of Antiquities and Museums commenced its ambitious 
programme. 

The second publication concerned with archaeology which was established 
in the peninsula is the Journal of Oman Studies, the first number of which 

55 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

appeared in 1975. 24 This, too, has provided valuable coverage of the course 
of Oman's distinctive archaeological heritage. 

Another important undertaking instigated by the various governments 
in their attempts to bring an understanding of the past of the peninsula to 
its present-day inhabitants has been the creation of museums, designed 
to conserve and present the region's ethnographical and archaeological 
heritage. This has become a particularly creative and innovative aspect of 
the work of the Antiquities' Departments (and others) in the states 
concerned. 

The first attempt at a museum which set out to employ contemporary 
communications and exhibition techniques was in Bahrain in 1970. It was 
opened on the occasion of the Third International Conference in Asian 
Archaeology which was held in the state during March of that year. 25 The 
museum, though it was quite a modest installation, excited both warm 
comment and considerable interest in Bahrain and in the Gulf. It was essentially 
archaeological in character, though it attempted also to communicate some 
of the elements of the many ancient myths and legends associated with 
Dilmun-Bahrain to its visitors as well as something of its rich and varied 
ethnography. Bahrain has now built and equipped a splendid new museum, 
part of a complex of buildings on the corniche in Manama. It contains what 
is beyond question the most important collection of archaeological material 
from the Gulf. It also houses extensive ethnographic collections, and examples 
of modern Bahraini art. 

The next important museum development was in Bahrain's neighbouring 
state of Qatar. There the Amir, Shaikh Khalifa bin Hamed Al-Thani, made the 
creation of a museum one of his first publicly announced priorities when he 
assumed the rule of his country in February 1972. The Qatar National Museum 
was set up on an abandoned and derelict site belonging to the Amir's family, 
on the sea-front at Doha, the capital. It was a particularly fortunate circumstance 
as the site contained a number of ruined but still beautiful traditional houses, 
in one of which the Amir had been born. They were restored and formed an 
integral part of the museum, together with a new building, known as the 
Museum of the State, which contained the principal archaeological and 
ethnographical collections (probably the most important in eastern Arabia), 
a marine museum and a lagoon on which were moored examples of typical 
Gulf sailing-craft. 26 

The Sultanate of Oman has also shared in the Gulf's programme of museum 
development. Its first museum was opened at Seeb, to provide an introduction 
for visitors to the country, which is large, complex and rich both in its 
environment and its history. Later, one of the fine eighteenth-century 'great 
houses' in Muscat, Bait Nader, was restored to provide a museum for the 
capital. 

Oman's most notable museum however, the Museum of the Sultan's Armed 
Forces, was also to be housed in a restored eighteenth-century house, this 

56 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

time a fortified country house, at Bait al-Falaj, in the Ruwi Valley, which 
guards the approach to the capital city. The house, a particularly fine example 
of Oman's architecture of the period, was carefully restored and now contains 
a historical survey of the Sultanate's important military past. 

The United Arab Emirates has come relatively late into the conservation 
of its heritage but it now has several museums, or similar installations, 
established within its territory. A museum has been set up in the fort at 
Dubai; a fine coastal fort has also been restored at Ras Al Khaima and contains 
a museum for the state. Both contain locally recovered archaeological material, 
drawn from the several expeditions which have been conducted in the UAE 
in recent years. 

Kuwait maintained a small museum on Failaka island, the scene of a large- 
scale engagement during the Iraqi withdrawal from the territory which it 
invaded in 1990. The collections of early second-millennium material from 
the island's sites are irreplaceable. The collection of Islamic art, formed by 
Shaikh Nasser Al Sabah, which was seized by the Iraqis, was removed to 
Baghdad but is reported to be intact. 

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has embarked upon the most elaborate 
and imaginative museum programme of all the peninsula states. The first 
museum project of the newly constituted Department of Antiquities in 1974 
was the creation of the Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography in Riyadh. 27 
The planning of the historical profile for the museum provided the 
opportunity to set the chronology of Arabia into a firmly established 
sequence for the first time, ranging from Lower Palaeolithic times in western 
Arabia, to the Revelation of Islam and the foundation of the Kingdom by 
King Abdul Aziz bin Abdul Rahman Al-Saud, in the early decades of the 
present century. 

Plans have now been developed for a national museum to be built on 
one of the most important sites in the city of Riyadh, which incorporates the 
Murabba Palace, one of the principal residencies of King Abdul Aziz. At the 
same time the planning of the restoration of the Masmak fortress, which was 
captured by the then Amir Abdul Aziz at the outset of his campaign to recover 
his patrimony in January 1902, has been completed. The Masmak is to be 
installed as a museum for the city of Riyadh, with the themes of the relationship 
of the oasis to the city — one of the essential paradigms of the development 
of Arabia's history — and of the unification of Arabia which began with the 
capture of the Fortress. 

The most ambitious project of the Department of Antiquities and its 
advisers was the creation of a network of regional museums throughout 
the country. Thus far, six have been completed, at Jizan, Najran, Al-Ula, 
Taima, Jawf and Hofuf; two more are planned, at Khamasin and between 
Buraida and Anaiza. 

The regional museums are designed primarily to serve archaeological 
and historical sites within a 200-kilometre (125-mile) radius. They 

57 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

comprise conservation, records, photographic and draughting facilities, 
storage, accommodation for visiting archaeologists and others and 
exhibition halls for the display of archaeological and other material 
from the region served. Each museum contains displays, common to all 
the museums, which relate to the history of the Kingdom and identify 
the relationship of the region represented by the museum in the larger 
sequence of Saudi Arabia's history. 

The creation of the site or regional museums throughout Saudi Arabia 
has provided the opportunity further to extend and to refine the 
archaeological and historical sequences first set down in the more restricted 
compass of the Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography in Riyadh. Each 
of the six so far completed has a double purpose: to act as the centre for 
a local archaeological region, expressing the essential, historical character 
of that region, and second, to provide a national framework for the history 
of Saudi Arabia, into which each museum may be placed, defining the 
contribution of the region to the Kingdom's history and archaeology 
overall. 

The museums are built to two basic plans, varied to suit the local terrain 
and its physical conditions. Taken together, the museums will constitute a 
powerful influence in bringing about a unity of policy and activity in a country 
as diverse and as large as Saudi Arabia. 

Plans are also in hand for the restoration and conservation of the 
monuments in the important north-western site of Mada' in Saleh, or Higr. 
This consists of a rock-enclosed, approximately circular area in which are 
contained over 130 superb rock-cut tombs built by the Nabataeans, the builders 
also of Petra, further to the north. 

The rapid, even spectacular, advances which the Danes made in Bahrain 
in the first ten or so seasons of their work inevitably — and quite properly — 
prompted them to look at the larger context in which Dilmun had 
established itself and in which its strange mixture, of the mercantile and 
the mystical, flourished. At the same time word of the Danes' success 
began to filter into other parts of the area, with the consequence that they 
began to look at, and later to commence work in, various of the states 
around Bahrain. 

Their exploration of these areas was rewarding; they began to lay down 
the archaeological profile of the whole region, from Kuwait in the north to 
Oman. Each state made, as it were, its own distinctive contribution to the 
story of the Gulf's ancient prosperity. The results of that work are set out in 
these pages. 

Some misgivings, understandably, were expressed, though in the mildest 
terms, by the Bahraini authorities, who felt that their hospitality, generously 
given, was becoming a trifle strained by these excursions into the lands of 
their neighbours. However, as the Danes' work in the adjacent states tended 
to prove Bahrain's ancient paramountcy for so much of the period when the 

58 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

Gulf culture was at its most productive, they stifled any reservations that they 
might otherwise have felt. 

The Danes had the field largely to themselves throughout the first twenty 
years of their work from 1953 onwards. Then, in 1970 a decision to hold the 
Third International Conference in Asian Archaeology in Bahrain drew the 
attention of the worldwide archaeological community to what was contained 
in the Gulf's islands and the mainland contiguous to them. 

The conference, which was also the occasion for the inauguration of 
the first Bahrain Museum, which brought into existence a whole generation 
of museums in the Gulf, was attended by archaeologists of many 
nationalities. They included two of the most distinguished living scholars, 
Sir Mortimer Wheeler and Dame Kathleen Kenyon. Sir Mortimer was 
representative not only of the British Academy of which he was the 
Secretary, but also of the archaeology of India, of which he was one of 
the innovators. Dame Kathleen had excavated extensively in Jordan, 
particularly at Jericho, the site which will always be associated with her 
name. 

During the conference a total of seven papers was presented which bore 
directly on the Gulf in antiquity. The scholars who attended the conference, 
the guests of the unfailingly generous government of Bahrain, were able to 
visit all of the island's principal archaeological sites. 

The years which followed the 1970 Conference saw foreign teams 
beginning to challenge the virtual monopoly which the Danes had enjoyed. 
Representatives of the most advanced disciplines being developed in 
archaeological technology were drawn to the Gulf states from the United 
States, Britain, France, Italy, from Jordan and Iraq. The rate of publication, 
often supported by the local Departments of Antiquities, escalated significantly; 
more and more books on the region's antiquity began to appear in the 
bookshops and on the shelves of learned institutions. 

One of the principal causes of the advancement of the study of the Gulf's 
archaeology occurred in 1983 when the Government of Bahrain held a large- 
scale conference entitled 'Bahrain through the Ages' in Manama in December 
of that year. The 200th anniversary of the foundation of the ruling Bahraini 
dynasty, the Al Khalifa, fell at this time. With typical modesty and maturity 
the Government of Bahrain, eschewing military parades and the spectacle 
which might have appealed to a less enlightened regime, chose to 
commemorate the event by convening a conference which would lay down 
the historical profile of the State of Bahrain over its nearly 5,000 years of 
recorded existence. 

The 1983 Conference was in marked contrast in scale to its 1970 precursor. 
Over 120 scholars attended it at the invitation of the Government of Bahrain, 
from all over the world. Over eighty papers were presented to the conference, 
dealing with Bahrain in all its historical manifestations, from the earliest times 
to the beginning of the twentieth century. 

59 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

The Proceedings of the conference are published under the general title 
Bahrain through the Ages in two substantial volumes. 28 The first, The 
Archaeology, extends approximately to the period immediately before the 
coming of Islam; the second, The History, deals with the period from the 
Revelation of Islam to the beginnings of Bahrain's modern history. 

Since the Bahrain Conference the rate of publication of serious work on the 
archaeology of the Gulf has further increased. Today it may be said with reasonable 
confidence that the Gulf is beginning to be represented in academic bibliographies 
to an extent appropriate to the importance and variety of its historical experience, 
making it comparable with some of its more established peers. 

The 1970 Conference in Bahrain acted as an important stimulus to 
archaeology in the Gulf as a whole. It came at the right time: considerable 
political and social changes in the Gulf states were bringing new leaders to the 
fore who recognized the importance of the past, the need to present its records 
and its physical evidence, in laying down a sound basis for a contemporary 
society. At the same time upheavals in the Middle East meant that it became 
increasingly difficult for foreign teams to work in many of the countries which 
had traditionally formed the foundation of much of the western world's foreign 
archaeological activity. The relative freedom of working in the Gulf states and, 
in many cases their evident concern to encourage the establishment of a proper 
archaeological structure, gave the opportunity for many foreign institutions to 
mount expeditions to various of the states. 

The French proved to be particularly active in this regard. French teams 
were responsible for important work being carried out in Failaka (which 
they virtually took over from the Danes) in Qatar, where they changed radically 
the chronology which hitherto the Danes had attributed to the stone tools 
which are so much a feature of the scoured landscape of the Qatar peninsula, 
in Bahrain, where they have worked extensively on the post-Dilmun levels 
at the Qala'at al-Bahrain, in the UAE and in Oman. 

A British committee, intended to promote the participation of British 
institutions in the archaeology of the Gulf, had been formed after the 1970 
Conference. It has similarly been active throughout the ensuing years. Its 
earliest work was in Qatar, at the time of the preparation of the National 
Museum, when it was necessary to undertake an archaeological survey of 
the country. Amongst other notable discoveries (described further in Chapter 
8) the committee's expeditions found the first evidence of the connections 
with makers of Ubaid pottery from early Mesopotamian sites in the lower 
Gulf, at several Qatari sites. 

Later the same committee despatched an expedition, over several seasons, 
to Bahrain. This also found important Ubaid traces (at Al Markh, initially) 
and excavated a remarkable late third millennium 'temple' structure at Diraz 
(see Chapter 7). 

The Americans too were much engaged, especially in Saudi Arabia, where 
they had been involved in the Kingdom-wide survey conducted throughout 

60 



THE PROGRESS OF GULF ARCHAEOLOGY 

the 1970s by the Department of Antiquities. Several of the early expeditions 
mounted by the Saudi Arabian Department were conducted with the 
participation of American institutions and scholars. 

More generally, the British have been active in the UAE, conducting 
extensive excavations at ed-Dur, for example. The French have also made 
important contributions to the archaeology of the Emirates, in Sharjah and, 
particularly, in Abu Dhabi where they have worked on a number of early 
and later third-millennium sites, at Hili and Al Ain. German activity in the 
Gulf has not, thus far, been extensive but teams from Gottingen have worked 
in Shimal in the UAE. The Danes have sustained their interest throughout the 
years, though inevitably on a somewhat reduced scale. The Italians have 
been active in the Sultanate of Oman, especially at the important, very early 
fishing settlement at Ras al-Hadd. 

The Arab states have also contributed to the latest phases of the Gulf's 
archaeology. In the Sultanate of Oman Moroccan teams of conservators have 
been engaged in the restoration of several of the sumptuously decorated 
fortified palaces which were built by the country's rulers in the seventeenth 
century. In this work they were preceded by the Italians, who were responsible 
for several of the original programmes of conservation in the Sultanate. 

Arab archaeologists have made important contributions to the 
understanding of Bahrain's archaeology. Several seasons' work by Jordanian 
teams, working with Bahraini and American specialists, carried out valuable 
work on the grave mounds, particularly those at Sar. Two important 
publications resulted from this activity (Ibrahim, 1983; Mughal, 1983). 

Throughout this period the national Departments of Antiquities have been 
growing in size, confidence and skills. More and more the work of uncovering 
the past of the Gulf region will be carried out by Gulf nationals. However, 
the scope is so substantial and the areas involved so large that it is probable 
that foreign expeditions will be welcomed in the area for a long time to 
come. 

Over the period of the last century or so during which archaeological 
activity — of one sort or another — has been pursued in the Gulf the outlines 
of the study of the region's ancient past have remained remarkably consistent. 
Durand, the pioneer of Gulf archaeology, recognized the importance of the 
fields of burial mounds and saw them as the evidence of a long-vanished 
civilization. He apprehended the importance of sites such as Barbar and was 
able to see a place in the archaeology of the central Gulf for the Mesopotamians 
and for Alexander the Great. The Phoenicians tended to intrude into many 
of the early studies of the region, witnesses to the significance which the 
early history of the Levant occupied in the consciousness of European 
scholarship in the latter part of the nineteenth and the beginning of the 
twentieth centuries. 

Apart from Petrie's inspired intervention, when he seems, almost by instinct, 
to have detected a connection between the Gulf and archaic Egypt, an intuition 

61 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

which was not, at the time, pursued, the grave mounds were the dominating 
theme of such studies as there were. Cornwall, following Mackay, recognized 
that the dominion of Dilmun extended to the Arabian mainland, evidenced 
by the presence of grave-mound fields there which were comparable with 
those in Bahrain. 

At the heart of the history of the Gulf's archaeology lie the extraordinary 
perceptions of Rawlinson's review of Durand's notes on his 1878/9 expedition 
to Bahrain. The implications of Rawlinson's analysis of the importance of the 
Gulf's ancient culture are so profound and so perceptive that it is a further 
wonder that the Gulf had to wait until relatively late in the twentieth century 
for the archaeological community to pay it the attention that it so manifestly 
deserved. 



62 



CLIMATE, SEA-LEVELS, 
MAN AND HIS COMPANIONS 



It is not only man who has been profoundly affected by the often dramatic 
climate of Arabia. He shares the land and, so far as he is able, the sea, with a 
rich and varied fauna, many of which have adapted with extraordinary 
ingenuity to life in so apparently bleak an environment. Thus it is a pleasing 
thought that the unicorn, that fabulous and magical beast, may still be alive, 
well adapted and living in eastern Arabia. 

Like the phoenix, the unicorn is a creature of the desert as much as it 
is of fantasy, the product of who knows what tales ancient travellers 
brought back with them from the further limits of the known world. Yet 
the probability is that the unicorn is the oryx, a creature which combines 
massiveness with elegance, and power with seeming tranquillity. The 
unicorn is an inhabitant of that misty land which divides legend from 
reality; at one moment he is visible and he is gone the next. He is notable 
for his susceptibility to virgins; indeed, so susceptible is he that he will 
surrender himself to human captors if a virgin is available in whose lap 
he may lay his head. 

There is no evidence that the oryx, if he is indeed the unicorn's prototype, 
shares this unusual propensity. But there is no doubt that overhunting of the 
poor beast contributed to his imminent extinction. It is estimated that there 
are probably no more than a few dozen head of oryx left in the wild in 
Arabia. It is greatly to the credit of governments in the peninsula that efforts 
to save the species have now been rewarded with success. 

In their preserves the oryx maintain a watchful, dignified existence. To 
go among them is disconcerting: they turn on newcomers a long look of 
cool appraisal and then, thoughtfully, lower their massive heads on which 
grow two long, thin, black, razor-sharp horns. The young of the breed are 
pretty and delicate creatures; but power, not prettiness or delicacy, is the 
characteristic of the adults, particularly of the bulls. Their long, slender 
horns, which look as though they could be deadly, are the cause of the 
oryx's identification with the unicorn: seen in profile their two horns become 
one and the equation is exact. Both Aristotle and Pliny held the view that 
the oryx was the unicorn's prototype. 

63 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

But another factor, other than the depredations of man, has contributed to 
bringing this rare and beautiful antelope to the very edge of extinction. This 
is the fact that in all probability the oryx is a relic of an earlier climatic period, 
in popular terms, a living fossil. It belongs to the fauna of the Plio-Pleistocene, 
a division of geological time which ended around 2 million years before the 
present. Then the climate of eastern Arabia was somewhat more generous 
than it is today; it could support, in what was probably a savannah-type 
environment, herds of animals larger and more dependent on supplies of 
food and water than are those creatures which survive in the desert today, 
when the climate is, truly, hyper-arid. 1 The oryx is said never to drink water 
in the wild; this, however, sounds more like a traveller's tale than an 
observation of strict scientific fact, though the animal is known to have a 
phenomenal ability to detect small quantities of atmospheric moisture. It 
also feeds at night when, in desert conditions, plants contain more moisture 
than they do during the day. 

Arabia presents conditions as harsh as anywhere in the world for the 
survival of animals. These extreme conditions — scorching heat, occasional 
bitter cold, and sparsity of vegetation — have meant that species have had to 
adapt in order to survive. However, the vegetation and abundant water of 
the Al Hasa oasis, one of the largest in the world, provides a powerful attraction 
for birds and desert animals. 

In order to survive in deserts, animals have adapted both their behaviour 
patterns and their physiology. Their overriding need is to minimize water 
loss in the face of high daytime temperatures and extreme aridity. Lack of 
water also means scarcity of food, shortages of prey and a scarcity of other 
members of the same species. In consequence sharp hearing, mobility and 
an ability to store food are crucial in many desert-dwelling species. The lack 
of cover also means that camouflage colouration is often found. 

The oryx serves to illustrate one of the characteristics of the climate of 
eastern Arabia and the fauna which the region sustains: the climate of the 
Gulf region is liable to quite marked changes which have often been rapid 
and sometimes very substantial. It has long been recognized that climate and 
the geophysical factors which attend his habitation have profoundly influenced 
the life and development of man. But just how profound such influences are 
and how fine the tolerances may be which can divide abundance from 
devastation are only now being apprehended by scholars; they have always 
been very clearly apprehended, let it be said, by people such as the desert- 
dwellers, living at the whim of nature for millennia. 

The margin, taking temperature for example, or the effects of prolonged 
rainfall or of drought, is fine indeed; a few degrees' change overall, either 
way, could bring in its train another ice age or spread the deserts across 
lands which are now rich and fertile. Man clings precipitously to the edges of 
the inhabitable world; but he is the most malign influence in effecting 
ecological change and has been so throughout the millennia. 

64 



CLIMATE, SEA-LEVELS, MAN AND HIS COMPANIONS 

The climate of the last 10,000 years or so, during which the whole of the 
history of modern, city-dwelling man is compressed, has been especially 
benevolent. Because our planet has been enjoying a phase of exceptionally 
favourable climate, cities have been built, empires have arisen, art has 
flourished and man has stepped on to the moon. A degree or two away from 
the global mean and the development of mankind would have been 
irreversibly blighted. It could still be. 



GEOLOGIC ORIGINS 

The extreme nature of the climate in eastern Arabia on the one hand 
demonstrates the effects which can so easily occur in consequence of climate 
shifts and, on the other, the extraordinary ability of man to adapt even to the 
most improbable climatic circumstances. Geomorphologically, Arabia is still 
a relatively volatile part of the earth's land surface. It is moving, drifting 
inexorably in a north-easterly direction, thus separating itself still further 
from its original union with Africa and pushing steadily against Iran. The Red 
Sea was flooded in early Pliocene times (c. 12 million years ago) when the 
final rupture with Africa was effected and the land bridge which had joined 
east Africa with south-west Arabia was broken. 2 

Before the Gulf came into existence, what is today eastern Arabia and 
Iraq were covered by warm shallow seas. Between 12 and 2 million years 
ago, during the Pliocene age, the Arabian peninsula continued to move north- 
east as a result of continental drift, reducing the size of the sea, and creating 
the Gulf. The Zagros mountains of Iran were thrown up by the collision of 
the peninsula with Iran. This movement is still continuing. 

For much of this period the Eastern Province is known to have been dry 
land; but later, between 2 and 3 million years ago, research has shown that 
the sea-level was up to 150 metres higher than today. This meant that much 
of the Eastern Province and the Rub' al-Khali was under water. The coastline 
lay in the vicinity of al-Hufuf, along the edge of the al-Summan plateau, 
while Jabal al-Qara was an island, and the beating of the waves formed 
caves. 

The sands of the Rub' al-Khali, the Empty Quarter in the south-east quadrant 
of the peninsula, came into being at this time, composed of sediment washed 
down from the Hijaz and Yemen mountains into a shallow sea. 

The extent to which the Gulf is still in motion can be demonstrated at 
both its extremities and in the centre. Thus the Kuwaiti part of the delta at the 
head of the Gulf has been shown to have subsided by more than 30 metres 
over the past 5,000 years, 3 whilst at its south-east limit the Musandam peninsula 
in Oman has subsided by approximately 60 metres during the past 10,000 
years. On the other hand the Bahrain Ridge, in the centre of the Gulf, is 
thought still to be rising. 4 

65 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

The Gulf is a product of the Tertiary period; it was formed as a consequence 
of tectonic movement, of the great plates of the earth's surface grinding 
further away from each other. It is a roughly rectangular depression, 
approximately 1,000 kilometres (600 miles) in length from its head, where 
the Tigris and Euphrates debouch, to the Straits of Hormuz, guarded on the 
western littoral by the towering walls of Ras Musandam; it is 230 to 250 
kilometres (150 miles) wide. The seabed slopes quite sharply; the Arabian 
coastline is fairly shallow whilst the deep water is all on its Iranian side. Its 
mean depth is 35 metres whilst its maximum is approximately 165 metres. 
The circulation of the Gulf is believed to be a counter-clockwise motion, 
with its waters moving up the Iranian coast, crossing the head of the Gulf 
and then flowing down the Arabian littoral. Temperatures range between 
15° and 33°; in the shallow waters the temperature can reach as high as 40°. 5 

Although the physical profile of the Gulf was laid down long ago (though 
relatively not so long ago in terms of the geological age of the Earth), it is 
really only in comparatively recent times that it has assumed the character 
and appearance with which we are familiar today. The environment of eastern 
Arabia has been affected by marked fluctuations in the conditions which 
permit more or less permanent settlement. Some of these fluctuations have 
continued well into the historic lifetime of man. 



CLIMATE 

The question of the extent of climate change, and its effect upon a region as 
climatically extreme as eastern Arabia and the Gulf now are, is difficult of 
analysis or solution. Whatever may have been the true effect of changes in 
seawater stands, of the different levels in the water-table and the apparent 
variations in the rate of precipitation, one influence on the environment is 
definitely to be identified — man. If ever the present generation, with its 
laudable concern for the protection of the environment of our beleaguered 
planet, needs to call evidence from the past, that of eastern Arabia will stand 
as a sufficiently awful warning for even the direst prophet of the impending 
destruction of our species. 

One factor alone may be cited to demonstrate the extreme fragility of the 
conditions under which we live and the hazards which, all unthinking, we 
inflict on ourselves and our descendants. Much of the wealth of eastern 
Arabia in antiquity was drawn from the discovery of the uses to which copper 
could be put; indeed, a neat equation of copper, spice and oil can stand for 
the last 5,000 years of Arabian history and its sum, the acquisitiveness of the 
world outside the peninsula. But copper, before it can be manipulated by 
the smiths, must be smelted: smelting demands high temperatures and heat 
requires fuel. It is thus far speculation, but it is surely not unwarranted to 
suppose that in Oman, on the terraces perhaps of the Jebel Akhdar (the 

66 



CLIMATE, SEA-LEVELS, MAN AND HIS COMPANIONS 

Green Mountain), in north-west Arabia and Sinai, where extensive fourth- 
and third-millennium copper mining sites abound, and even on Bahrain 
itself, millions of trees were sacrificed to the needs of the copper industry. 
The stripping of the hillsides in Oman, for instance, would immediately reduce 
precipitation: the value of trees as wind-breaks would be lost and the fertile 
earth would be swiftly eroded. 

How much, therefore, the needs of the ancient copper industry may be 
the cause of much of today's deserts is a moot question. Certainly it seems 
not unreasonable to think that some of their most extreme aspects may be 
quite recent in origin and at least in part are the consequence of man's own 
inability to maintain his environment properly. 

The degree of tolerance in these matters is very slight and the extent of 
change, either of climate or of the environment, and the level of precipitation 
in a particular region due to the loss of an ancient stand of trees, needs only 
be marginal to bring about a catastrophic alteration in the balance of nature. 
Tinkering with the environment is one of the more dismal inheritances of 
the ancient world. 

Man is not entirely unaided in his depredations on the world around him. 
In this malignant process he possessed a most industrious assistant who 
played a notable part in denuding landscapes; this was the goat, whose 
domestication was distinctly an equivocal benefit. 

There is some disagreement about the extent to which Arabia was affected 
by the great glaciations which so dominated the last million years or so in the 
northern hemisphere (Fig. 3.1). However, glacier wasting in the north raised 
sea-levels throughout the world between 20,000 and 10,000 years ago. To 
whatever degree Arabia shared in these larger climatic changes, the volatility 
of its own was such that climate patterns were subject often to quite short- 
term changes: for example making part of the coast for a period capable of 
supporting a larger population than before, in consequence of a short 'wet 
phase'. There is evidence of several 'wet phases' in eastern Arabia; of the 
most recent, the first ended about 10,000 years ago, whilst another began 
1,000 years ago and lasted for 300 or 400 years. 6 This coincides, for example, 
with the growth and decline of the little fishing settlements at Murwab and 
Huwailah in Qatar recorded and published by the British Expedition in 1978, 
following the successful survey in Qatar from October 1973 to January 1974. 7 



THE FAUNAL RECORD 

The discovery of Dryopithecine remains in north-eastern Arabia 8 demonstrates 
the extent to which the climate 15-12 million years ago differed from that of 
its present profoundly desert, hyper-arid character. Dryopithecines are arboreal 
creatures, tree-haunting and flourishing in a broad savannah-type 
environment; they may or may not be on the line of ancestors which 

67 



CO 



o 

CO 



01 

> 



o 










f- 








J .5 


o 








■ T5 




o 

E 

E 




O 

in 
oo 


1 3 

■ f 

■ C 




tj} 




**- 








< 


6 

CM 




o 




a> 


V 




o 




_ 


i 




lf— 


c 


eu 


m 






s 


ts 


in 






13 


i 


~-— 






o 




a 






£ 




CD 






■a 






■ '^> 




c 




d 


M co 




(0 






^B N 














to 






^B 


o 


> 






^H 'o 


o 


0) 








o 

1 — 


to 

ID 

15 

<U 

c 
a> 
o 
o 






■ c 

-J CO 

■ 


o 


o 








o 


X 








£3 










o 














tD 
CO 
< 

.U 

W 
CO 




^^P^ en 

P^ to 
I a> 


o 




—I 




■1 ^ 


o 








.^^ 2 


o 








4flj B 


o 
o 




s6v aoi 




<t— 








BBl^ - c 




at 
c 

8 


a6y eo j 






o 






4B W 




"to 


a6y eo| 






a. 






w o 


£ 








^^fc 






a6v 80| 






as 










c 










d 










o 






H 




o 






^H « 




!£ 






^» E 




a. 








£ 








H 


o 








■ O) 


1 — 


Si 
CO 

'■E 






H 

H 


e 


<u 








o 


K 








o 










T- 











o 

a 



— 

c 



< 



— 

C 

1) 

C 









5 



68 



CLIMATE, SEA-LEVELS, MAN AND HIS COMPANIONS 

ultimately produced man. In their heyday Arabia probably would have looked 
much like East Africa now, with plenty of cover for larger game. 

During the Miocene period, 17-15 million years ago, a shallow sea covered 
much of eastern Arabia and what is today the Gulf. 9 Swamp and marshland 
would have been part of the rich environment, the consequence of the 
prevailing hot and humid climate. 

The savannah-like terrain would have supported gazelle, giraffe, pig, rodents 
and rabbit (Fig. 3.2). In the denser woodlands and the mangrove running 
down to the lagoon's edge would have been found elephant, rhinoceros and 
dryopithecus. Around 12 million years ago the climate became more arid and 
the trend towards still greater aridity continued into the Pliocene. 10 

There is evidence that from Pliocene times (from c. 3-5 million to c. 1,2 
million years ago) Arabia underwent a protracted 'wet phase' when in all 
probability it enjoyed a warm, moist climate. Its vegetation then would have 
been lush and tropical. During this long wet phase it is possible that hominids, 
like those that flourished in East Africa at the same time, were present in 
Arabia. At this time the great wadi systems (dried-up river or flash flood 
courses) of Arabia, Wadis al-Rima and al-Batn, and Wadis al-Dawasir and al- 
Sahba came into being in a period of much greater rainfall than today. 
Extensive erosion of the upper reaches of the wadis was matched by the 
deposition of fans of gravel and silt washed down in the lower reaches. 
Much sand was washed down into a sea covering the Rub' al-Khali in the 
south. This sand, since dried out, has been shifted and sorted by the wind to 
form the sand deserts of today. During the Pleistocene period the level of 
the Gulf's waters fluctuated, as did many of the world's seas, the result, 
doubtless, of the advance and retreat of glaciers during the successive Ice 
Ages." After this time arid conditions supervened, reaching a level similar to 
that prevailing now, around 17,000 years ago. Since then the climate has 
varied erratically and recent evidence has distinguished a sort of climatic 
antiphon, with an arid phase being followed by a moist one, in at least eight 
periods over the past seventeen millennia (Fig. 3-3). 

The faunal record in ancient Arabia is still very far from being complete. 
However, the presence of large beasts, such as mastodon in Abu Dhabi (at 
Jebel Baraka) 12 and in the eastern region of Saudi Arabia, 13 testify to a marked 
degree of environmental change over the millennia. In recent years a number 
of significant palaeontological finds at a site near Jebel Dhanna in Abu Dhabi 
have been reported. 14 A group of Miocene-period rocks, the Bainuna 
Formation, has revealed a considerable concentration of Miocene fauna. 
This discovery is of importance in contributing to the mapping of faunal 
distribution worldwide during the Miocene. At this period a land bridge 
joined Africa and Asia; many species therefore, which originated in Africa, 
reached Asia through Arabia. 

The fossil-bearing rocks of the Bainuna Formation are remarkable for the 
quantity and accessibility of the faunal evidence which they preserve. So far 

69 




1) V 

c '0 



a s; 

o — 






•g » 

U C 

s o 

a -c 

o ■» 

o 



.5: 
5 



70 



1 ,000 Years 


Wet/Dry 


Environment 


Periods 


5 — 

10 — 


> < 

X 


Recent dunes 

T Ancient soil surface 


ui 

z 

LU 

o 
o 

_i 
o 

X 


1— 

CO 

O 

s 


Shallow lakes, stabilized dunes, grassland 








15 — 
20 — 
25 — 


o- rr 

>- < 

i 


Dunes 


UJ 

z 
111 
o 
o 

H 
CO 

111 

_l 

DL 
LU 

_l 






30 — 


H 

co 

o 


Lakes and alluvium, wadi formation 


35 — 

40 — 














45 — 


Q 

rr 

< 


Old dunes, lakes and alluvial deposits 




50 — 
55 — 






111 

z 

LU 

o 
o 

co 

UJ 

-i 

Q. 








h- 

co 
O 

2 






60 — 
65 — 
70 — 


Lakes, stabilized old dunes, wadi formation 










75 — 









71 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

the remains of late Miocene fauna, including Deinotheres (distantly related 
to the modern elephant), hippopotamus, crocodile and turtles are amongst 
those identified. Remains of a macaque-like monkey and of the three-toed 
Hipparion, an ancestor of the horse, have also been found; evidence has 
been recovered from the same formations of what may have been an archaic 
canid. These fauna are characteristically Ethiopian; when they existed in 
Arabia the environment would have looked more like the landscape of East 
Africa today: savannah, woodland, lakes and swamp. 

To judge from the rock carvings which are found in other parts of Arabia 
(the eastern region does not seem to have encouraged the development of 
that most characteristic and ubiquitous art form as did other parts of the 
peninsula), lion, baboon, ostrich and water buffalo, all creatures of the 
savannah, were common in later times. 1 ' It is from this sort of ecological 
environment that the oryx probably descends and, by chance, survives. 

It is in the region of the Rub' al-Khali, the Empty Quarter of south-eastern 
Arabia, so often the focus of all manner of traveller's tales, that the change in 
eastern Arabia's capacity to support life is shown at its most dramatic. Both at 
the edge of this tremendous sand-sea, whose arid dunes and sandy wastes 
stretch from horizon to horizon, and deep into areas which are virtually 
impervious to sustained human access, are to be found many small Neolithic 
hunting and fishing encampments, perhaps even some more permanent 
settlements. 16 The presence of the Neolithic Arabians, who lived here 6,000- 
5,000 years ago, is marked by the scatters of the fine and elegant tools they 
made, some of the most beautifully crafted artefacts to have survived from 
Stone Age Arabia, or, indeed, from anywhere else. Here have been found 
the remains of hippopotami, which once lived in the swampy margins of 
what was a series of lakes and inland waters, reaching deep into the desert. 

Generally speaking, however, in the period during which man has inhabited 
the region, the fauna, some members of which would have contributed to 
his diet, has probably not changed greatly. The desert hare, the fennec fox, 
the gazelle, the ibex and the diminishing oryx have all been present, then as 
now. The onegar, a form of wild ass, was probably once indigenous and has 
now disappeared; the camel is domesticated now, but that is a relatively 
recent development. In the third millennium and for much of the second it 
was probably known but as a relatively rare and certainly wild beast; it did, 
however, make some contribution to the inhabitants' diet. 17 Some enterprising 
fisher folk varied this diet significantly by the addition of large aquatic mammals 
like the dugong or sea-cow hunted by the early settlers at Umm an-Nar in 
Abu Dhabi. 1X 

The richness of Arabia's fauna in the relatively recent past is demonstrated 
by evidence from the region to the south and west of the peninsula. In the 
south-west Rub' al-Khali, the evidence of the presence of large bodies of 
standing water well within the lifetime of man is also supported in a rich and 
varied faunal register. This includes the Asiatic wild ass (a relative of the 

72 



CLIMATE, SEA-LEVELS, MAN AND HIS COMPANIONS 

onegar), Bos primigenius, the great archaic bovine which once also roamed 
the forest lands of Europe, Hippopotamus antiquus, the water buffalo and 
the ostrich. 19 Since the hippopotamus inhabited the east, it is possible that at 
least some of the others were once present there. The probability is that 
increasing desiccation and the lowering of the water-table drove the animals 
further and further south and west, until ultimately they encountered in man 
a scourge probably more dangerous than even the most inhospitable climate. 
When the Rub' al-Khali was lacustrine, the coast of eastern Arabia would 
have had the appearance of a string of little islands with deep inlets reaching 
into the desert, rather like the creek around which Dubai has developed. 
This would have affected parts of Qatar and the northern coast of the Oman 
peninsula where the United Arab Emirates is now located; it also affected 
Bahrain, for the small al-Ubaid pottery-bearing site at Al-Markh was a little 
island at the time of the occasional fishing expeditions which landed there. 20 
It is now part of the principal island of the Bahrain archipelago. In Oman, 
evidence from Umm as-Samman 21 shows that an arm of the sea once reached 
there. Today it is many miles distant from the coast, stretching indeed up to 
and beyond the border with Saudi Arabia. 



SEA-LEVELS 

During the middle and later Pleistocene, from about 80,000 years ago, the 
level of the waters in the Gulf fluctuated, as indeed was the case worldwide. 
In many places along the western (Arabian) shore of the Gulf it is possible to 
see old shorelines from times when the sea-level was a few metres higher 
than today; others have also been detected underwater in the Gulf. Such 
changes in sea-levels were the consequence of the advance and retreat of 
the glaciers during the succession of glaciations and interglacials. The 
formation of these ice-sheets locked up vast quantities of water, leading to a 
lowering of the sea-level worldwide. 

The level of the Gulf appears to have risen and fallen fairly sharply over 
the past 100,000 years (Fig. 3.4(a)). 22 There is considerable evidence that 
between 120,000 and 10,000 years ago the sea receded, leaving the sandy 
floor of the Gulf exposed. It would then have been a broad plain, watered 
probably by an extension of the Shatt al-Arab, which may have reached the 
shelf margin of the Gulf of Oman, representing a fall of some 110 metres 
below the present level. 23 The most marked regression of the Gulf waters 
happened between 70,000 and 17,000 years ago: then the sea withdrew 
beyond the Straits of Hormuz. 

Whilst there is evidence of marked changes in the sea levels in the Gulf, 
such changes are far less dramatic in the Gulf's sister, the Red Sea, to the west 
of the Arabian peninsula. This would appear to be contradictory and the 
dilemma which it produces has not yet been resolved. 

73 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




re 3.4 (a) Sea-levels in the Arabian Gulf from c. 14,000 BC to c. 6000 BC. 




Figure 3.4 (b) Bathymetric profile of the Gulf. 



74 



CLIMATE, SEA-LEVELS, MAN AND HIS COMPANIONS 

During the latest cold peak in the last Ice Age, 18,000 years ago, the sea- 
level fell to 110 metres below today's. In only a small area inside the Strait of 
Hormuz was the sea present. The exposed seabed consisted of a pattern of 
wadis and sand-dunes, much like Arabia today. The Tigris and Euphrates 
rivers, which today empty into the Gulf, may not have reached the sea but 
have run into the sand. 

The sea began to return around 17,000 years ago. An acceleration in the 
process took place about 11,000 years ago, perhaps by as much as 2 to 4 cm 
per annum. Bahrain Island became separated from the mainland between 
6,000 and 7,000 years ago; 24 previously it had simply been a dome-shaped 
prominence inland. 

The sea reached its maximum transgression (that is, its highest level) 
between 7,000 and 4,000 years before the present. Then it was perhaps 
some 2 metres higher than it is today. 25 Along the low coastline which 
characterizes so much of the Arabian littoral of the Gulf even so relatively 
small a rise in sea-level would result in the flooding of large areas. 

An aspect of the Gulf's tendency to acute climatic variation was of crucial 
importance in influencing the course of human settlements in the area and, 
in consequence, the development of the societies which lay around its shores 
and on its several islands. This was what is generally known as the 'Neolithic 
Wet (or Moist) Phase'. 26 

Over the past 36,000 years or thereabouts the climate of the Gulf has 
veered between relatively moist periods, in which there was a notable increase 
in precipitation, and periods of aridity, some of which, like the one which 
persists today, were of considerable ferocity. Thus the period 7000- 4000 BC 
saw the appearance of active springs and shallow lakes with a consequent, 
if slight, increase in rainfall. Even the most minor variation will permit — or 
prevent — settlement and the raising of crops and herds. During this time 
there is clear evidence in eastern Arabia of the creation of small, probably 
seasonal, settlements of people who may, from the evidence of their tools, 
have been the forerunners of the Gulf's most enduring industry, the harvesting 
of pearls. 27 

Another climatically hospitable period is detectable between 3000 and 
2000 BC. This coincides with the formation and early flowering of the Gulf's 
most important cultural and social phenomena, the prosperous mercantile 
communities associated with the Dilmun culture. 

CHART OF MOIST AND ARID PHASES 

Moist 34,000-15,000 BC 

Arid 15,000-13,000 BC 

Moist 13,000-9500 BC 

Arid 9500-7000 BC 

Moist 7000-4000 BC (the 'Neolithic Moist Phase') 

Arid 4000-3000 BC 



75 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Moist 3000-2000 BC 

Arid 2000-800 BC 

Moist c. 800 BC-AD 200 

Arid c. AD 200-c. AD 900 

Evidence for fluctuating conditions also comes from Saudi Arabian locations 
including lake deposits at Jubba in the Nafud, throughout eastern Arabia 
and on the outskirts of the Rub' al Khali. Such evidence can be supported by 
that from locations in the Saharo-Arabian desert belt which has always been 
climatically a homogeneous unit due to similar latitude, elevation and 
topography. 

One of the features of the physical landscape which are particularly evident 
throughout all the Gulf seaboard states are the sabkha, the surface salt-pans 
which are found around the coast and inland where the sea has once 
transgressed. Essentially, the sabkha are formed by the action of the sun on 
sea-water held in shallow pools on the surface of the desert. The water 
evaporates as a consequence of the sun's heat and a salt-encrusted layer is 
formed, the salt being drawn up, as it were, to the surface by the effects of 
evaporation. 

Many of the Gulf sabkha are relatively recent in origin. Those in the 
Abu Dhabi coastal area have been dated by the Carbon- 14 process to 
approximately 4,000 years before the present. 28 However, whilst inland 
sabkha tend to be lacustrine in origin, some of them are relics of the 
marine transgressions; thus some of the sabkha inland in Saudi Arabia 
represent a sea-level approximately 150 metres higher than at present 
and in Oman the sabkha of Umm as-Samman is thought to have been one 
such relic. 

The importance of the water-table, that is, the artesian or other potable 
waters that lie below the surface of the land, is obviously supreme. In Arabia 
the water-table slopes eastwards, rising as it does so. The aquifers are fed by 
the winter rains and melting snows of the Syrian and Jordanian mountains; 
much of the water in the aquifers is fossil water, put down in some cases 
20,000 years and more ago. The fact that the water-table rises as it slopes 
towards the east accounts for the remarkable phenomenon of the freshwater 
(or at least brackish) springs which bubble up from the sea-floor around 
Bahrain and which must have contributed considerably to the island's ancient 
reputation for sanctity and special selection by the gods. It may also account 
for the name by which the region has been known, at least since Islamic 
times: Bahrain, the 'Two Seas'. 

Six thousand years ago the early urban civilization in southern Iraq was 
already undertaking large-scale irrigation projects; transportation by land 
was effected by the domestication of the donkey. 29 In eastern Arabia small 
semi-pastoral communities depended upon domesticated goats, sheep and 
cattle as early as 5000 BC. 30 The first domestication of these animals and of 

76 



CLIMATE, SEA-LEVELS, MAN AND HIS COMPANIONS 

wheat and barley appears to have taken place in the Fertile Crescent, Anatolia 
and the Zagros mountains between 9000 and 6000 BC. 31 

Although in geographical terms it is outside the limits of this study, it may 
be appropriate to record, in this context, one of the least anticipated results 
of recent archaeological survey in Saudi Arabia, the discovery of the 
widespread and large-scale domestication of cattle. 32 This is apparent in the 
western region of the peninsula and in the north. Large herds of bovines 
could only be supported by climatic conditions much more hospitable than 
is the case today. The cattle herds were evidently numerous and the people 
who herded them created an elaborate form of art which celebrated the 
animals; on what seems to be every available rock surface in northern and 
parts of western Arabia representations of cattle, of divinities associated with 
them and of the men and women who kept and guarded them, are pecked 
or engraved on the rock surfaces. 

In the earliest stages of domestication wild goats and gazelles may have 
been captured and coralled for meat. The need to provide fodder for them 
may have led, first, to the collection and then the cultivation of cereals about 
10,000-9,000 years ago. Barley and two types of wheat are found wild in the 
Fertile Crescent. Herding and cultivation led to domestication and then to 
physical changes in the various species brought about by many successive 
choices of the most suitable individual animals and plants for human use. 
The Gulf was to benefit from the increased activity of settled, urban living 
which allowed the people of southern Iraq to develop all manner of 
specializations which, because of their land's lack of natural resources, 
encouraged them to seek new lands and new sources of supply for the raw 
materials they needed, to the south. 

It is one thing to excavate the evidence of man's past from the sites where 
he has lived and to analyse them, extrapolating from them such assumptions 
as we may be able to make about the way he lived and the motivations 
which moved him: it is quite another to investigate the history of the earth 
which bore him. The evidence of climate in eastern Arabia is complex and 
often obscure but the very lack of research in the region, compared with 
other parts of the Near East, prompts scholars to consider recovering such 
evidence as they can about the factors of climate and the physical environment 
before social and industrial development, which are now sweeping across 
the region furiously, obliterate it forever. 



77 



DILMUN, THE ANCIENT 
CULTURE OF THE GULF 



To set the Gulf, its islands and the coastal lands of eastern Arabia into a 
coherent historical and cultural perspective it is helpful to look first at the 
structures and mores of the societies which are immediately contiguous to 
them, and which exercised a notable influence on the region throughout 
the course of its history. Of these lands by far the most important and 
influential was Mesopotamia, the Land of the Two Rivers. Iran, Inner Arabia, 
the Indus Valley and Oman were all, to varying degrees, to exert an influence 
on the character of ancient Bahrain and the Gulf, but none of these seems 
to have approached Mesopotamia in the depth of its impact and its enduring 
quality. 

This is especially true in the earlier periods, when Dilmun was presumably 
located in eastern Arabia. Then the natural contact was with Mesopotamia, 
as much by land as by water. Certainly the gods of Sumer were always 
identified with Dilmun (see Chapter 5). The myths which associate Dilmun 
as the place of origins, the birthplace of the gods, were Sumerian. 1 Later it is 
clear that influences from the Indus Valley began to predominate in many of 
the aspects of the society which evolved in the Gulf. But these tended to be 
at a firmly pragmatic level — a common system of weights for example — 
which obviously are derived from considerations of commerce rather than 
belief in the gods. Philosophically and intellectually, so far as the evidence 
can be interpreted, Mesopotamia continued to exercise the most profound 
influence on the Gulf, even though it evolved its own typical forms and no 
doubt its own ideas, maintaining its independent connections with other 
peoples far distant from the Land of the Two Rivers. 

Mesopotamia is today principally contained within the borders of the 
Republic of Iraq and divides naturally into two geographical regions, north 
and south; its other divisions are ethnic and religious and do not concern us 
here. In the early centuries the south was incomparably the more important 
of the two, though a northern Mesopotamian influence can frequently be 
discerned, even in the earliest times, until ultimately, in the second millennium 
BC, it became dominant. Then it imposed its character on the whole extent 
of the Land between the Two Rivers. 

78 



DILMUN, THE ANCIENT CULTURE OF THE GULF 

The essential quality of Mesopotamian culture was its extraordinary capacity 
for invention, the product of the genius of the land's first and most notable 
inhabitants, the Sumerians. Whilst the progress achieved in the scientific 
cultivation of crops and the management of herds owed much of its origins 
to northern Mesopotamian farmers, it is as city-dwellers that the Mesopotamian 
people are most significant, and the emergence and growth of the city is to 
be observed particularly in the south. It was because of the Sumerians' 
dependence on the city as the basic structural element in their society that 
their influence spread far beyond their own borders, affecting the patterns of 
life in lands and times far distant from their own. 



THE FIRST CITIES 

It is clearly significant that in Egypt and Iraq, and later in India and China, the 
first great urban civilizations grew up in the river valleys. The siting of settlements 
on the banks of fast-running and capricious rivers and the consequent invention 
of irrigation permitted the development of sophisticated agricultural techniques. 
These, in turn, led to the conditions in which a highly developed political 
organization became necessary, to ensure that the manpower of the community 
was marshalled in good order, and that the canals and the lands which depended 
upon them were efficiently maintained and protected in the interests of the 
community at large. The emergence of the warrior caste and ultimately of 
kingship itself resulted in all probability from techniques associated with the 
management of rivers and canals. Thus it may be said that technology played 
a critical part in the establishment of early societies and the hierarchies and 
social structures which grew up within their boundaries. As the communities 
grew and as the more skilful, charismatic or more powerful leader would 
begin to assert a form of hegemony over more widely dispersed groups, so 
kingship would be, in the Sumerian expression, 'handed down'. 2 The principle 
of government under an autocratic ruler was early on found to be essential to 
control the resources that the societies had at their disposal and so to produce 
what was required for the needs of an increasing population. This in turn led 
to the emergence of a class structure and the fostering of specializations and 
individual skills by members of the societies, the early artist-craftsmen whose 
work expanded the horizons of their contemporaries and made it possible for 
the corporate life of the state, in the person and way of life of the ruler or in the 
service of the gods, to find expression. Through the invention of writing and 
of monumental inscriptions it also became possible for one generation to 
communicate with others over long periods of time and to elimninate the total 
dependence on oral tradition which characterized all earlier attempts at 
formulating the corporate beliefs and intellectual inheritance of the community. 
Building in stone and brick led to permanence not only in architecture 
but in beliefs and social structures; however, the use of long-lasting materials 

79 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

in architecture was not, it is now known, an original invention of Near Eastern 
societies. Carbon- 14 datings from some western European megalithic 
structures suggest that they are earlier in construction than all monumental 
buildings in the Near East thus far known. But so far as we know, the societies 
in northern France, Britain and Malta which produced these remarkable 
monuments did not develop structurally as did their Near Eastern peers. It 
was the invention of writing which made still greater controls in the society 
possible and led to entirely new dimensions of experience. 

From the ability to retain ideas in a permanent form came man's discovery 
of still further potentials, hitherto only dimly realized, within himself. The 
ability to make permanent records which were capable of comprehension 
by any with the necessary skills (which, unlike other forms of craftsmanship, 
required only a normal intelligence and application for the acquisition of 
proficiency) was arguably the most important single advance ever made by 
man. It is one with a special relevance to the future of the societies in the 
region with which we are concerned. Equally, by the better organization of 
his resources man discovered the means to produce more than he needed of 
both the necessities and the luxuries of his world. Gradually he found the 
leisure in which to produce more and better things and in which to enjoy 
them. From this last discovery, the creation of surplus, the confines of his 
world expanded dramatically, for now trade and the peaceful intercourse of 
different peoples became familiar aspects of his everyday life. 

In Mesopotamia special conditions prevailed, for man had settled there 
relatively late in his dispersion over the surface of the inhabited world, 
although Lower Palaeolithic sites have been found in the north, as have the 
remains of Neanderthals. 3 The Neanderthal was once the prototype of the 
half-human, half-ape, a creature of nightmare whose brutish existence was 
liable to abrupt termination by his equally brutish neighbour. But discoveries 
at Shanidar, in northern Iraq, and the analysis of other remains have begun 
to present a different picture of a creature who cared for and protected the 
old and infirm in his group and who, at their death, went out on to the 
hillside to gather flowers to bury with them. The discovery, too, that the 
cranial capacity of Neanderthals is on average somewhat larger than modern 
man's has also begun to qualify the unflattering picture which Neanderthal's 
modern descendants (if such we are, in part at least) were pleased to draw of 
him. Instead of the loping brute of earlier belief, Neanderthal is rapidly 
acquiring an air of pensive and gentle melancholy — a generalization which, 
though more kindly, may be as specious as the earlier one. 



MESOPOTAMIAN ORIGINS 

In Mesopotamia, the contrast between north and south is most marked in the 
earliest periods. In the north, around the tenth millennium BP, the beginnings 

80 



DILMUN, THE ANCIENT CULTURE OF THE GULF 

of agriculture and the controlled breeding of herd animals appear for the 
first time anywhere in the world. But the southern part of the land offered 
little inducement for settlers, since it was virtually bereft of minerals, stone or 
trees. Only when man had learned to control his environment, in particular 
to manage the rivers and lagoons which formed so much of the southern 
landscape, and so himself to create the conditions in which his needs could 
be satisfied, did a settled existence become possible in the southern part of 
the Land of the Two Rivers. 

Over millennia small groups of migrants had drifted into Mesopotamia 
from the south and the west, where the deserts of Arabia lay, from the mountain 
lands of Iran in the east, and from Syria and Anatolia in the north. In the 
north the little settlements flourished and, incidentally, very early on began 
to produce pottery of an extraordinary fineness and elegance. It is remarkable 
that some of the earliest pottery in the world is also some of the most beautiful: 
that which is identified with Hassouna and Halaf is of quite exceptional, 
indeed superlative, quality. 4 



THE ARABIAN NEOLITHIC 

The early Arabian Neolithic was affected by the agricultural and pastoral 
revolution in the Fertile Crescent as a whole. However, the lack of permanent 
settlement and the differences which are apparent in the stone tool 
assemblages imply rather a transition by a hunting and gathering society 
towards an early pastoralism but one with a strong reliance on hunting. The 
particular influences and the constraints of Arabia's environment produced 
special cultural developments distinct from those of other settled societies in 
neighbouring regions. 3 Tools from this period — blade-type tools with projectile 
points and scrapers — have been found in eastern Arabia in the lower levels 
at Ain Qannas, south of the Hasa oasis and in the Yabrin oasis area, near 
extinct sources of water, in areas where water collected, and in the valley 
bottoms. 6 

The Neolithic brought a great diversification of stone tool types, both 
through advances in manufacturing techniques and by the recognition of a 
wider range both of needs and of possibilities. In these toolmakers we can 
perhaps recognize the first 'experts' or craft specialists; it is still possible to 
identify 'workshop' sites where tools were fabricated, sometimes 'roughed- 
out' and prepared for final shaping by another 'specialist'. 7 The immense 
range of Neolithic tools is well demonstrated from northern and southern 
sites in eastern Arabia and from the Qatar peninsula. 8 In these processes the 
marginally more benign climate undoubtedly assisted in occupation of regions 
which otherwise, and later, would be inhospitable to peoples still reliant to 
a substantial degree on hunting and gathering. 



81 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

THE UBAID 

By the end of the fifth millennium another culture of comparatively high 
development had spread both to the north and south of Mesopotamia. It is 
from the south, from a small tel not far from Ur, that its archaeological site 
name of al-Ubaid derives. 9 Little is known of the social structures of the 
people who lived there, other than through the traces which were left in 
succeeding cultures and their most distinctive pottery, which is found over 
an immensely widespread area, fanning out from Mesopotamia to the Levant, 
Iran and, most significantly in this present context, to east Arabian and Gulf 
sites. As for evidence of religious cults, in the oldest pre-Sumerian settlement, 
Jarmo in northern Iraq, a goddess figurine has been discovered, but no 
representations of gods of comparable antiquity are known. In the Ubaid 
region in the south it is a fair guess that the priesthoods must have been 
exceptionally powerful. The size of many Ubaid period temples is formidable. 
The Ubaid pottery levels are followed on southern Mesopotamian sites 
by the more sombre Uruk pottery and then by that which is typed by its find- 
site, Jemdet Nasr. In terms of absolute chronology Uruk spans the middle 
centuries of the fourth millennium and Jemdet Nasr continues until the 
beginning of the third. 10 It is thus equivalent in Egyptian chronology to Naqada 
II or the Gerzean period, immediately prior to the First Dynasty of kings." In 
Sumer (to use the term which by the beginning of the third millennium is 
appropriate) these pottery sequences are followed by the Early Dynastic 
period, which, divided archaeologically into three phases, continues until 
the appearance of Sargon the Great in the twenty-fourth century BC. 12 



THE SUMERIANS 

By the end of the fourth millennium southern Mesopotamian society has 
become recognizably Sumerian, in language, custom and in the development 
of that most Sumerian of institutions, the city. The Ubaid culture disappears, 
subsumed into the predominantly Sumerian mass. However, the transition 
from Ubaid to Sumerian is virtually unmarked and, whilst it was once thought 
that the Sumerians were a 'new people' who arrived at some unspecified 
point in the first half of the fourth millennium, this view is today much less 
firmly held. Rather, scholars believe that Ubaid society evolved into the 
Sumerian, perhaps with the leavening of some alien elements but with no 
evidence of a major population change having taken place. The evidence of 
a long pottery sequence from Ubaid to early Sumerian forms is one of the 
more convincing arguments in favour of a cultural continuity in the south 
over the thousand years or so which anticipate the first certain appearance 
of the Sumerians as a distinct and identifiable group around 3500 BC. 13 The 
evidence of language is less clear, however; whilst the first pictographic 

82 



DILMUN, THE ANCIENT CULTURE OF THE GULF 

tablets to be found in Sumer are thought to be written in Sumerian, many of 
the place-names which were adopted as the names of the cities and shrines 
of Sumer are not themselves Sumerian words. 

They appear to be the inheritance of some pre-Sumerian strain which 
once was thought to be the remnants of the language of the Ubaid people — 
Proto-Euphratean, as it was sometimes called. It is by no means certain, 
however, that such a separate language ever existed and the issue is yet 
another of the perplexing elements still unresolved in the history of this 
distant epoch. 14 

The problem of the origins of the Sumerians themselves is one of the most 
tantalizing of the unresolved mysteries of the ancient world. At one time or 
another, practically every possible origin (and a variety of quite impossible 
ones) has been suggested for them, but still the question must, for the present, 
end in uncertainty. Their language, usually one of the surest means of 
pinpointing an ethnic group's origins, bears absolutely no relationship to 
any other language, living or dead. Sumerian is agglutinative, that is to say its 
clauses are built up by adding syllabic elements to the original root. In this it 
is similar to Finnish, Turkish, Hungarian and Basque, but it is connected 
with none of these nor with any other known tongue. 

Sumerian was a rich and flexible language and it soon became one of the 
most powerful media for the expression of the Sumerians' exceptional creative 
genius. Sumerian literature, with its amazing repertory of epic poems, of the 
sagas of heroes, 'wisdom' literature, hymns and songs, love poetry, proverbs 
and laws is immensely rich; 1 ' it boasts the oldest surviving corpus of literary 
texts in the history of the world and, in many ways, one of the most noble, 
full of humanity and with a deep concern for the human condition. No 
account of Sumerian ways can ignore the literature of the Sumerian people 
and in the present context extensive use will be made of extracts from that 
part of the literature which bears upon the Holy Land of Dilmun, a particular 
theme of these early epic writers. 16 



THE INVENTION OF WRITING 

The most important single contribution which the Sumerians made to the 
progress of mankind was the invention of sophisticated writing systems. It is 
difficult, maybe even impossible, to think of any invention which has 
contributed more to the fulfilment of man's destiny, nor one which has added 
more to his enjoyment of the world in which he found himself placed by the 
whim of the gods. 

It is not certain that the Sumerians were the first to invent the concept of 
writing. In Upper Palaeolithic times, it has been suggested, some form of 
calendrical notations may have been employed to keep track of the seasons 
and the passage of the days. 17 

83 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

A group of tablets excavated at Tartaria in Rumania, has been thought by 
some observers to bear some resemblance to early Sumerian forms and to be 
ancestral to them. If this was the case, it would hint at yet another point of 
origin for the Sumerian people themselves; however, the Tartaria tablets 
may be later than first thought or, at best, may simply represent another 
direction from which some powerful, contributing influence travelled. 18 

Recent research has opened up another remarkable and exciting vista on 
the origins of writing. For many years past, workers on sites in the Near East 
have been turning up quantities of small baked clay objects in a variety of 
seemingly arbitrary shapes, spheres, half-spheres, cones, tetrahedrons and 
the like. These have been variously described — as toys or ritual objects — or 
dismissed outright as inexplicable. 

These tokens are found on sites dating back as far as the ninth millennium 
BC. This is astonishingly early, coinciding virtually with the first appearance 
of agriculture in the Near East, one of the most momentous of all changes 
which man has experienced since Upper Palaeolithic times. 

These various shapes seem to have been used over the many thousands 
of years which separate their first appearance from that of the first tablets 
from Sumer to carry what may properly be called 'writing'. What makes the 
discovery so momentous, however, is the recognition that they are the earliest 
device for recording the numbers and species of animals possessed by a 
temple, for example, and that the scribes of several thousand years after 
their introduction used the same symbols, incised on stone or clay, as were 
represented by the clay tokens. 19 

Frequently the tokens were contained in hollow clay containers, roughly 
the size of tennis balls. On the outside of the container the number and type 
of tokens which it enclosed would be incised, to prevent fraud or the passing 
of incorrect information. The only example so far known to have come from 
an east Arabian site is stated to have been 'an isolated surface find near 
Dhahran in Saudi Arabia'. Sadly, it was removed from Saudi Arabia and is 
now in the United States. 20 However, such precedents as the 'tokens' in use 
before the Sumerians' introduction of writing do not in any way diminish the 
splendour of the Sumerian achievement; the Sumerians were the first to 
devise a technique of making permanent records which was also flexible 
enough to be capable of expressing concepts and ideas and of recording for 
ever the very speech of the people. 

The earliest known examples of Sumerian writing come from Kish 21 and 
Uruk, 22 two of the most ancient antediluvian cities in Sumer; those from Kish 
are marginally the earlier but both sets of tablets are dated to the Uruk period. 
On these small, cushion-like clay tablets, excavated from levels c. 3500 BC, 
were found pictographs, representations of the object about which it was 
required to record quantities. From this point the technique developed rapidly, 
with the pictographs becoming more extensive as the records became more 
complex. It was soon realized that the simple representation of an object by 

84 



DILMUN, THE ANCIENT CULTURE OF THE GULF 

drawing a picture of it was both cumbersome and limited. Then the great 
leap forward was taken in synthesizing the pictographs with abstractions 
which would represent the object on one level but also the sound of the 
word or syllable concerned on another. By this means it was possible to 
develop a form of writing which could itself record observations without 
being wholly dependent on the representation of objects alone. The actual 
script devised for this purpose is known as cuneiform, for the characters are 
wedge-shaped, the product of Sumerian 'pens': sharpened reeds whose angled 
writing points most easily produced the combination of lines and wedges 
which made up the Sumerian script. Ultimately there were some 2,000 standard 
signs of which 600-700 were in general and relatively frequent use. To learn 
them and to inscribe them competently must have demanded a formidable 
standard of education for the boys who attended the schools specially set up 
for the purpose of training scribes. The scribal profession was one which 
was greatly to be envied, a situation which also prevailed in Egypt. 

The sophistication of the Sumerian intellectual establishment even in the 
fourth millennium BC was quite extraordinary. This is demonstrated by the 
fact that, like many early languages, Sumerian originally had an extremely 
complex and cumbersome vocabulary. Thus it was particularly rich in nouns 
with many words for objects which would more conveniently be qualified 
by adjectives. At some point in the latter part of the fourth millennium, the 
language was reformed and instead of there being, say, twenty-six words for 
various types of sheep, the number was drastically reduced and qualifying 
adjectives (or their equivalent) employed. This was surely one of the most 
remarkable and momentous intellectual decisions ever taken in the history 
of man. 

The cuneiform script itself went through some six stages of adaptation 23 
before it was finally stabilized into what might be called its classical form 
around 1800 BC. When the Semitic-speaking hordes from the Arabian and 
western deserts began to move into the Sumerians' lands, since they were of 
course illiterate, they adopted cuneiform as their own form of writing though 
it is ill suited to a Semitic language. As a consequence, however, of the tribes' 
adoption of it, its use spread to other Semitic language-speaking states around 
the Near East, so that by the middle of the second millennium BC, 2,000 
years after the Sumerians had invented it, cuneiform was widespread in use 
throughout the ancient world, though Sumerian itself had become purely a 
liturgical language by then. Typically, since they believed that nothing of 
theirs could ever be improved upon, only the Egyptians did not employ 
cuneiform characters (except under diplomatic duress), preferring their own 
system of hieroglyphic and hieratic scripts, the first of which is surely the 
most elegant yet invented by man. 

It has been suggested that the Egyptians must have borrowed the idea of 
writing from the Sumerians as the chances of both peoples independently 
making the same revolutionary invention at roughly the same time (the earliest 

85 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

examples of Egyptian writing appear shortly after the Sumerian) is stretching 
the theory of independent development too far. However, the Egyptian system 
bears little relationship to Sumerian forms, and it seems strange that this 
should be so if the Egyptians did borrow the idea originally. In the later 
centuries of the second millennium, when all the kingdoms in the Levant 
and Mesopotamia were using cuneiform, even the scribes of the Egyptian 
foreign office, who maintained an extensive correspondence on the Pharaoh's 
behalf with his contemporaries, were obliged to conduct this part of their 
correspondence in cuneiform. With the Egyptian conviction that their ways 
were so unreservedly superior to all others, this necessity of writing in another 
people's orthography must have been a trying experience. 

The texts which have survived from Sumer, and which are to be reckoned 
in tens of thousands at least, are preserved on clay tablets, the most convenient 
and accessible substance which the scribe could procure on which to write. 
Following the same cushion-shape of the earliest stone tablets, the clay tablets 
were first smoothed, the characters swiftly incised on them with the wedge- 
shaped reeds and then baked, in which form they are virtually indestructible. 
Often they were sealed in envelopes and then (like the earlier tokens from 
which, in a sense, they may descend) neatly filed away in archive rooms 
which have become familiar and important elements in the excavation of 
many a Near Eastern palace or city site. 

The consequences of the Sumerian preoccupation with writing — and they 
were an almost compulsively literate people — was to be of profound importance 
to the people of the Gulf settlements. The Sumerians did not invent writing 
primarily to record their folk epics or the proverbs which show them to have 
been a worldly-wise people with a nicely ironic cast of mind. Their purpose 
was, some might think, a less elevated one; they were concerned to maintain 
accurate records of their trading activities. These activities were to become 
perhaps their greatest single preoccupation and trade accounted in no small 
part for the diffusion of Sumerian and Mesopotamian influences over a wide 
area of the known world. In this aspect of their life the Gulf islands and 
settlements played a particularly significant part. 



THE SUMERIANS AND TRADE 

The Sumerians were the first people to organize trade as a corporate function 
of the community, to a large extent making it the very basis of their societies. 
Southern Mesopotamia is an odd part of the world; it is now, as it was in the 
days of the Sumerians themselves, a land of harsh, windswept desert, of fast- 
running rivers that lay down rich silt and mud fields which are capable of 
exceptionally high yields when managed carefully, of lagoons stretching 
from horizon to horizon, teeming with fish and game, but virtually without 
any other natural resources whatsoever. There is hardly any stone in Sumer 

86 



DILMUN, THE ANCIENT CULTURE OF THE GULF 

and the few trees, such as they are, with the exception of the ubiquitous 
palm tree, are of little value to the craftsman or builder. 

Because of the nature of their land the Sumerians, in the latter part of the 
fourth millennium, were faced with a singular dilemma: a burning creative 
enterprise which was prevented from finding expression in the conversion 
of the products of nature into the artefacts of man. To obtain the raw materials 
their craftsmen needed, therefore, the city and temple administrators were 
forced to search for sources of supply far distant from their own ungenerous 
land. From early times we read of trading expeditions reaching out to far 
distant lands, of treaties between Sumerian states and foreign powers for the 
supply of Sumer's needs and the mounting of military expeditions to keep 
open the caravan routes or to subdue brigands and the other barbarians 
whose activities might prejudice the free flow of trade to and from the ports 
of Sumer's cities. 

In the course of developing a trade which ultimately stretched from Anatolia 
to the Indus Valley, from the Levant and the islands of the Mediterranean to 
central Asia and north and south through Bahrain and the east Arabian towns, 
the Sumerians devised a complex series of techniques to facilitate the exchange 
of goods on an international scale and to finance the activities of their 
professional merchants. 24 In the course of doing so they invented banking, the 
concept of capital and equity holding, mortgaging and the advancing of working 
or risk capital against securities, indeed much of the paraphernalia of 
international finance which sustains world-wide commerce to this day. Later 
this study will examine the surviving correspondence of an Old Babylonian 
merchant who, in immediately post-Sumerian times, operated a trading 
enterprise of some scale but of doubtful probity between the city of Ur and the 
city of Dilmun, located on the north shore of Bahrain's principal island. 25 

Sumerian trade operated in two ways: first by establishing sources of supply 
of the raw materials which were so much needed and, second, by creating 
export markets for the surplus goods the cities made, as a result of their 
enterprise and their skilful management of people and resources. The actual 
processes of manufacture were industrialized and highly organized. Factories 
were operated, turning out a particular product range, with a well-organized 
and generally well-cared-for labour force. Sumer's manufactures included 
textiles, furniture, jewellery, copper and bronze objects, and fine inlays; in 
addition she exported her surplus agricultural products. Her imports were 
first and foremost copper, and all sorts of timber and stone for her lapidaries, 
sculptors and architects. Timber came from Indian forests and from Oman; 
stone from Persia, perhaps from Oman and, in the case of the precious lapis 
lazuli much appreciated by the gods, from distant Badakhshan. Gold was 
mined in Elam (south-western Persia) and in Syria. 

The staple of Sumerian trade was copper; its conversion by man is very 
ancient and there is evidence of its being smelted in Anatolia in the seventh 
millennium. 26 Indeed, some scholars have suggested that the Anatolian sources 

87 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

were lost to the Sumerians in the fourth millennium BC; 27 in consequence, 
they were forced to look for other sources of supply, which they found, it is 
suggested, to the south: Oman may have been one of the principal sources 
discovered in this search. But the idea of Sumer's discovery of the Gulf being 
the consequence of her search for copper is improbable. No doubt the need 
to prospect the Gulf lands for this vital element in her economy added greatly 
to Sumer's knowledge of the region but there is really nothing to suggest that 
Anatolian copper was so significant in the early history of the people . However, 
it is certain Bahrain played an important role as an entrepot in the movement 
of copper from its sources, notably in Oman, to Mesopotamia. There is 
evidence of a considerable quantity of copper being handled in Bahrain, 
through the quays of the successive cities at the Qala'at al-Bahrain site. 28 

Trade was conducted, as will be seen from the correspondence which 
survives, by barter in part but also by the much more sophisticated technique 
of expressing equivalent values in a standard of currency, in the Sumerians' 
and Babylonians' case in silver. They did not, however, find it necessary to 
take the conclusive step of introducing a coinage. 



THE GULF AND SUMERIAN ORIGINS 

It has often been suggested that the immigrants into southern Mesopotamia, 
who were to become the Sumerians, came to the land from the south, travelling 
up the Gulf or along the Arabian coast. 29 The presence of Ubaid pottery in 
southern Mesopotamia has already been observed, and it has been found, in 
very recent years, on many east Arabian and Gulf sites. However, there is as 
yet no evidence that the Ubaid culture progressed, as it were, from south to 
north; indeed the pottery seems to suggest that the earliest examples are to 
be found in the north, whilst the analyses of Ubaid sherds which have been 
carried out on the Gulf examples connect them with potteries at Ur. 30 But the 
fact remains that the Sumerians believed that the arts of civilization had been 
brought to them from the Gulf by the fish-man Oannes, who may be a 
manifestation of Enki, the benign creator-god of whom much more will be 
heard before this present work is done. 31 One cycle of legend makes Dilmun, 
which features in the Sumerian consciousness both as a commercial trading 
centre and as an idealized Paradise Land, the place of creation, from which 
concept undoubtedly the Biblical story of the Garden of Eden is derived. 32 
Thus it would be unwise to dismiss absolutely the possibility that the people 
who became the Sumerians, or perhaps other immigrants who influenced 
them considerably, did come up the Gulf from some as yet unknown southern 
point of origin. 

The centre of the land of Dilmun, which exercised so powerful an appeal 
to the Sumerians, was the principal Bahrain island. However, its borders 
were never immutably fixed; at certain periods it was known to include the 



DILMUN, THE ANCIENT CULTURE OF THE GULF 

eastern Arabian coastline up to present-day Kuwait and to include Failaka 
island on which important early second-millennium remains have been found. 
Dilmun was not only the Place where the Sun Rises; it was also the Land of 
the Living, in Sumerian Kirlu Ti-La. 3i 

There has been considerable speculation whether the Gulf in Sumerian 
times reached significantly further north than it does today. The view was 
widely held, until fairly recently, that it did, this opinion being strengthened 
by the historical record of such cities as Eridu and Ur which boasted of a sea 
trade and which now lie up to 450 kilometres (150 miles) from the Gulf. At 
one time it was thought that the shorelines of the Gulf had not much changed 
since relatively early times, certainly since the lifetime of man. However, 
some doubt is now being cast on this view. 34 It may be that the region of 
southern Iraq, now inhabited by the Marsh Arabs, a people who could well 
be the last survivors of the Sumerian (even pre-Sumerian) way of life, was 
then, even more than it is today, an area of lagoons, reaching far into the 
Sumerian hinterland. Thus some of the principal Sumerian ports in the south 
would have been situated on the shores of a lagoon and linked by a chain of 
them, each opening into another, down to the Gulf. 



ERIDU 

Eridu, the most southerly of all the Sumerian cities, was also the most ancient. 
It was one of the great antediluvian cities, for the Sumerians reckoned historic 
time from the legendary ages before the Flood. Archaeology has borne out 
this tradition of Erudu's antiquity and suggests that it is a fact: so far, no city 
has been found that is of earlier date. A long series of temples was excavated 
at Eridu; the four oldest, reaching ultimately down to the virgin sand, are the 
earliest identifiable as buildings of the Ubaid period. 35 

In the context of the Gulf, this fact of the antiquity of Eridu is extremely 
important, for Eridu was sacred to Enki, the god of the sweet waters. 
Throughout Sumerian history Eridu was the cult centre of the one Sumerian 
divinity who was well disposed towards humanity. 

According to the evidence of legend, Dilmun and Enki were closely 
identified in Sumerian belief; the worship of the god, it has been argued, 
might have originated in Dilmun. 36 Enki is sometimes conflated with Oannes, 
the amphibious monster who swam up the Gulf, accompanied by a train of 
outlandish marine creatures. Oannes' epiphany has been cited as evidence 
that the Sumerians came from the south: it has been suggested that Oannes 
was a sort of abstraction of the people themselves and also, more pertinent 
to this story, that on their northward journey they had settled for a time on 
Bahrain island. This, it was supposed, accounted for the tenderness with 
which they looked back to Dilmun and for the sanctity with which they 
invested the island, making it in truth the island of blessedness and innocence. 

89 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

The exceptional antiquity of Eridu has further been called in support of 
the contention that it was the first true Sumerian settlement, the landfall as it 
were of the immigrants, who commemorated their seaborne journey by 
consecrating their first mainland city to the water-god Enki. In this context, 
too, it has been noted that in the second half of the fourth millennium, Uruk, 
the city which was to give birth to the greatest of Sumerian heroic kings, 
Gilgamesh, shows a marked and sudden increase of population. 37 It has 
been suggested that this increase might have been the consequence of a 
migration of people from the Gulf region. If such a migration took place (for 
which, at present, there is no archaeological evidence), it would account for 
the infusion of myths and legends which are centred on Bahrain-Dilmun, 
revered as the original home of gods and men. 

It has been noted already that most authorities see an uninterrupted 
sequence of occupation in southern Mesopotamia from early Ubaid times 
through to the first appearance of writing, and hence to the first appearance 
of the Sumerians when it was possible to put a name to them, in the latter 
part of the fourth millennium. 38 The most compelling evidence for this view 
comes from the Eridu temple itself: the earliest humble shrine, which underlies 
the great, late third-millennium ziggurat (which was consecrated to Enki and 
thus honoured the god of fish and the deep waters), displays a startling 
continuity from the days of Mesopotamia's earliest occupation, around 5000 
BC, down to the lifetime of the mighty ziggurat some 3,000 years later. The 
evidence of pottery too, is quite clear. From the products of the Ubaid people, 
through the types associated with the Uruk and Jemdet Nasr periods, the 
succession of each type from its predecessor is evident. Pottery is a certain 
marker in these matters and its evidence is unequivocal. Thus, if the Ubaid 
or the Sumerians, or any part of them, came from the south then they must 
have moved along the Arabian shore; but such Ubaid pottery evidence as 
there is at present, which has now been found at sites in eastern Arabia, 
Bahrain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, in the south of the Gulf, indicates 
connections with the later Ubaid and, in all probability, with established 
communities in Mesopotamia. 39 

One of the most significant artefacts from the very beginnings of the 
Sumerian period comes from Eridu in the late Ubaid period, the oldest 
model of a sailing-boat yet found anywhere in the world. 40 With a little 
modification, this type of vessel continued to sail the waters of the Gulf 
and, where they were navigable, the rivers of Mesopotamia, far into historic 
times. The Eridu boat would have been seaworthy and further supports 
the belief that the Gulf could easily have been explored by men in prehistoric 
times. It was on the Gulf's tricky waters, or on the waters of southern 
Mesopotamia's marsh-bound lagoons, that man first developed the art of 
harnessing the winds to his service and using their power to drive the early 
sailing craft of which the Eridu boat is the prototype. How far these early 
voyages reached is yet a matter of speculation but the presence of shells 

90 



DILMUN, THE ANCIENT CULTURE OF THE GULF 

which can only have originated in India, in a very early grave at Tepe 
Gawra far to the north in Mesopotamia, could be taken as evidence, even 
this early, of a route to India through the Gulf. A land route cannot be 
completely ruled out, however, though the experience of historic times 
makes it less likely. Shells from the Gulf have also been found in Egyptian 
graves of the Naqada I period, equivalent to the Uruk period in Sumerian 
chronology. Similarly, lapis lazuli has been found in Predynastic Egyptian 
contexts and can only have reached the Valley from the east. 41 Whilst again 
a land route cannot be dismissed, the possibility of these materials having 
reached Egypt by sea cannot be discounted. 

The most notable characteristics of Sumerian society grew out of the 
land and the conditions necessary to organize it in such a way that it 
could support a rapidly growing population with increasingly 
sophisticated needs. There is some evidence that the earliest Sumerian 
political unit was an assembly of free men who, under the leadership of 
the elders, together openly debated issues affecting the community. 42 
Some commentators have, perhaps a little optimistically, seen in this 
institution the earliest recorded example of democratic, even of 
parliamentary, government. In the event, however, this phenomenon is 
much more likely to demonstrate the lingering vestiges of the old tribal 
assemblies of Neolithic times, possibly an inheritance from the Ubaid 
communities, and one which clearly proved to be unworkable in the 
earliest phases of the true Sumerian period. However, the Sumerians 
remained throughout their history a fiercely independent and 
individualistic people. It would certainly not have been out of keeping 
with their nature if the citizens had demanded a share in their own 
government. The most inspired of Sumerian rulers, Gilgamesh, is, albeit 
in a purely literary context, shown consulting the elders of the state — 
and then going against their advice. 43 



THE SUMERIAN TEMPLE 

There is evidence that the earliest centre of administration and authority 
in the fledgeling Sumerian cities was the temple: this is logical enough, 
for the city is merely the central point of the earthly domain of the god to 
whom the city was consecrated. In the early centuries the city, and the 
state which depended on it, was, literally, a theocracy, god-directed and 
god-ruled. All land was owned corporately on the god's behalf and 
managed by his vicars, the stewards of his estate who in early times no 
doubt formed a powerful confraternity of priests under the rule of the 
En, the high priest. The title was sometimes also used in a purely political 
context, divorced from any cultic role; in such cases en may reasonably 
be rendered 'lord'. 

91 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

To these practical priesthoods the world may owe much. In the early 
centuries, trade, that essential aspect of Sumerian society, was in the hands 
of the temple authorities; merchants bought and sold on the temple's 
behalf and all the goods involved were the temple's property. The practice 
of writing was invented, so far as we may judge, principally to effect a 
system of accounting for the temple's treasure; the earliest pictographic 
texts are inventories of goods and animals in all likelihood belonging to 
the temple. 

One of the puzzles, and a most intriguing one, about the process of 
disseminating an invention like writing is how, in so fragmented a political 
society as the Sumerian cities undoubtedly were in the historic period, they 
managed to develop a writing system which rapidly became accepted 
throughout the land, paying no apparent regard to the distinctions which 
one city-state might vaunt over another or the pretensions which the adherents 
of one divinity might advance against the other gods. It seems that the sort of 
freemasonry which the priesthoods represented must have been powerful 
enough and sufficiently organized throughout the country to make the 
decisions of some central college outweigh local differences or preferences. 
It is perhaps the first historic example of a bureaucracy at work, maintaining 
its own larger interests at the expense of any short-term policies which might 
otherwise have supervened. 

But, though their states were governed either corporately or autocratically, 
the Sumerians nonetheless retained throughout their existence a respect 
for the individual and for the rule of law applied equally to all citizens, to 
a degree remarkable in antiquity. In most ancient societies it is generally 
the state, perhaps personified by the king, which is all-powerful and all- 
pervasive, private interests being liable to be sacrificed to a frequently 
arbitrary judgement of what was represented as the general or national 
interest. The Sumerians were the first people to attempt to define the role 
of the individual in society and to establish a formal, written code governing 
behaviour and defining responsibilities between one citizen and another 
and between the citizen and the state. In doing so, they invented law and 
rightly prided themselves on the fact. 44 



THE CITY-STATE 

The Sumerians thought of themselves as one people, and as quite distinct 
from their neighbours, but they early on fragmented into a constantly changing 
mosaic of little states, competing noisily with each other, though their frontiers 
sometimes barely stretched beyond the city walls. One after another claimed 
the paramountcy over the others, to be overtaken quickly by a marginally 
more powerful or politically more agile neighbour. Only rarely was the land 
harnessed under one leadership for longer than a lifetime and in general 

92 



DILMUN, THE ANCIENT CULTURE OF THE GULF 

terms Sumerian political history is made up of the records of the mass of little 
cities constantly squabbling amongst themselves like puppies in a basket. 

Sumer was thus never a unitary state for longer than a few decades at a 
time, the individual cities often maintaining much of their autonomous 
character meanwhile. When the distribution of cities, built perhaps on earlier 
Ubaid settlements, was established in the pattern which was to persist 
throughout the historic Sumerian period, Sumer could be said to stretch 
from just below modern Baghdad in the north to the sealands of the Gulf in 
the south, bordered by the Arabian desert in the west and the foothills of the 
Iranian plateau in the east; it was only some 10,000 square miles in extent, a 
tiny portion of the world's surface when measured against the influence its 
people exerted. Amongst the earliest cities, in addition to Eridu, were Ur, 
which provides much of the best known archaeological material from Sumer, 45 
Uruk, the city of which Gilgamesh was king, and Nippur, which was always 
the most sacred of Sumerian cities, consecrated to Enlil; Kish, Badtibira and 
Lagash were other cities of immense antiquity. By Early Dynastic times, in 
the first centuries of the third millennium there were some twenty city-states 
which made up the polity of Sumer. 46 

Each of them followed a similar if not identical political pattern: there 
would be a king or governor, a lugal or ensi, a temple to the principal god of 
the city and other lesser fanes consecrated to his or her coadjutors. Built 
around and beyond the sacred enclosure of the temple which formed the 
heart of any Sumerian city (and which was indeed the city's reason for 
existence, for the city was the personal property and domain of the divinity 
to which it was consecrated and the temple his or her dwelling-place) were 
the citizens' houses of baked mud-brick. The city's roads criss-crossed with 
blank walled alleys from which opened gates into the houses. These might 
be little more than one- or two-roomed huts, or in the case of the more 
prosperous craftsmen, merchants or administrators, spacious buildings on 
two floors, with pleasant courtyards and loggias elegantly decorated, 47 but 
like all well-designed Near Eastern dwellings to this day, looking inwards to 
the household and the family which it enveloped. None of the cities covered 
very large acreages; the most famous, Ur, covered about half a square mile. 
Uruk, the city of Gilgamesh, was much bigger, however, ranging over almost 
2 square miles. 

As Sumerian society developed and expanded, shops, factories, schools 
and barracks for the enlisted men became conventional landmarks in any 
Sumerian town. As, almost beyond anything else, the Sumerians believed in 
trade, the rivers' quayside market-places, where far-ranging ships would 
disgorge the merchandise of many lands, became more and more important 
in the life of the cities and central to the experience of its people. 

A busy, prosperous, creative and largely cheerful people, the Sumerians 
had, by the beginning of the third millennium, established themselves securely 
upon their land. In essence, the cities which they built, the clothes that were 

93 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

worn in their market-places, and the buzz of many tongues would have 
made their society seem little different from that of any Middle Eastern country 
up to the beginning of the twentieth century AD. 

The racial origins of the people of Sumer, it has already been observed, 
are unknown. They have not helped the matter by tending, throughout their 
history, to portray themselves as rather tubby, short-necked, round-headed 
people. In fact, the evidence of their skeletons indicates that their grasp of 
morphology was slight, but nonetheless many early commentators were led 
to believe that they were racially entirely distinct from the desert peoples to 
the west of them, who were Semitic-speaking and who constantly pressed 
upon the established urban communities which the Sumerians developed. 
But linguistic distinctions do not reveal themselves in skeletal remains: a 
Sumerian urban skeleton is indistinguishable from one of a Semitic-speaking 
desert-dweller. 

The successors of the Sumerians — the Akkadians, Babylonians and 
Assyrians — were Semites and the language and culture of the land became 
progressively Semiticized over the centuries to the extent that Sumerian was 
totally lost as a living language. However, from evidence so far available, it 
is impossible to argue anything conclusive about the Sumerian race. Certainly 
all the peoples of southern Mesopotamia intermarried freely and Semitic 
names in early Sumerian times are almost as frequent as Sumerian names 
surviving into the early Old Babylonian period. Within the present limits of 
knowledge, the terms 'Sumerian' and 'Semitic' are to be understood simply 
as cultural and linguistic divisions rather than as indications of distinct racial 
groupings. 

The recorded history of man-the-dweller-in-cities opens with the Sumerians 
having established themselves on their land and with the transformation of 
what were perhaps tribal or clan settlements, small villages which felt the 
need for some sort of 'central place' either for exchange or for ritual observance 
and so gradually led to the beginnings of city life. The earliest settlements of 
the Near East, which had developed erratically in Iraq itself, in Iran, Palestine, 
Syria and Turkey, rapidly grew in Sumer into what modern man would 
consider properly organized cities. By the end of the fourth millennium a 
sizeable proportion of the Sumerian population spent its life within the 
boundaries of a city. Unhappily, what may have been one of the primary 
considerations in drawing man to urban life, security, proved illusory in 
Mesopotamia, for the nomadic desert and mountain tribes, which hedged 
the cities about, quickly decided that they were prizes worth devouring and 
their riches worth seizing. Further, in moving to the city man had put himself 
at one remove from nature and the stress of city life began to weigh heavily 
upon him. 

It was an entirely new experience for mankind, this living together 
permanently in highly organized, usually tightly walled, settlements. Economic 
pressures and the need for firm political controls in a powerfully developing 

94 



DILMUN, THE ANCIENT CULTURE OF THE GULF 

economy were added to the hope of limiting the depressing cycle of onslaught 
and invasion which marred the enjoyment of life (or even its continuation) 
in post-Neolithic societies, newly awakening to the prospects which that life 
had to offer. The evidence available and the interpretations, particularly those 
which are influenced by modern psychological analysis, suggest that the 
transformation from Neolithic village communities to urban settlements and 
the development of political structures and technology brought in train a 
series of acute and radical changes and attendant tensions. The most profound 
of these were experienced, first, in the emergence of art as a formal discipline, 
which both in its origins and in its later practice was concerned with the 
unseen world as much as the real one; and, second, in the change from 
magic to religion, and consequently the organization of belief and the 
responsibility of man to the gods in terms which the modern world could 
comprehend. Art and religion were as inextricably intertwined in Sumer as 
indeed they have always been, practically everywhere else. 



THE ART OF SUMER 

There is little trace in early Sumerian art of the propitiatory role which religion 
often fulfilled in hunter-gatherer societies. It is much more concerned with 
the declared worship of the gods, the decoration of their temples and with 
binding them to care for the world of men. The cults which the people 
developed were, in the manner of religious observance ever afterwards, a 
method of catharsis, of the release of tensions and the assuaging of fear and 
apprehension. The uncertainty of their environment, the constant menace of 
the desert tribes and, eventually, the rivalries of the little cities themselves, 
all created a degree of uncertainty amongst those early city-dwellers which 
some may see manifested in the works of art which they produced. Monstrous 
shapes, reflecting man's deepest fears, began to emerge into tangible, 
artefactual form and so lost some of their terror. 

Although the judgement is necessarily a highly subjective one, much 
early Sumerian art often seems to be pathological in origin and demonstrates 
a neurotic, tense, introverted quality which can still be deeply disturbing. 
As man tried to accustom himself to living in the mass, these monster forms 
seem to betray the Sumerian's anxiety and uncertainty about coping 
successfully with the tensions which this communal life provoked. However, 
it is essentially this quality which makes the art of early Sumer so especially 
interesting: it is the first produced by a predominantly and consciously 
urban society. 

Although Sumerian art softened over the centuries and reduced many of 
the bleak and fearful qualities it early manifested, it never wholly lost this 
characteristic undercurrent of disquiet. It must also be admitted that, with 
important exceptions, the early art of Sumer is often notable, when compared 

95 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

for example with that of contemporary Egypt, for its technical incompetence. 
The Sumerians may be partly worsted in the comparison by the strict discipline 
displayed by Egyptian artists from the earliest times; but in any event they 
were better with words and ideas than with plastic materials, the result perhaps 
of living in a land bare of wood and stone. This peculiar blend of the neurotic 
and the incompetent did not, however, reduce the marvellous quality of 
Sumerian seal-cutting, in which perhaps the black-headed people achieved 
their highest and happiest artistic skills. Sumerian unhandiness, in any case, 
is rather endearing. 



ELAM 

The Sumerians were not entirely alone in developing that corner of south- 
western Asia which they occupied. To the west development was erratic, but 
to the east and south, in what is today south-western Iran, another talented 
people was establishing its place in the world. 

One of the imponderables of the archaeology of the Gulf in early times, in 
the late prehistoric period for instance, is the extent to which its culture and 
way of life were influenced by this people, one of the more mysterious of 
the Sumerians' neighbours, the Elamites. Elam broadly occupied the Iranian 
province known historically as Khuzistan, centred on the great and enduring 
city of Susa which, in turn, has led to the region sometimes being referred to 
as Susiana. By whatever name it is called, Elam was a powerful and influential 
western- Asiatic state, in many ways the peer of Sumer itself; it was also an 
important Gulf power, with a long reach of the eastern coastline under its 
control. 48 

The origins of Elam are as obscure as Sumer's. Their frontiers marched 
together in the region of the southern Zagros foothills. In historic times they 
were frequently in conflict with each other. Elam seems to have been a more 
integrated state than Sumer usually was, except on the infrequent occasions 
when a dynast in one of the little states emerged with sufficient power or 
charisma to impose his hegemony over the whole land. Cities in Elam, it has 
been suggested, were the consequence of the need for staging and exchange 
posts to be established to serve the search for raw materials and resources. 

Elam shared with Sumer the early use of sophisticated writing systems. 
The system the Elamites employed is an adaptation of Sumerian cuneiform; 
the paramountcy in its use is still Sumer's. Unfortunately nothing is known 
of ancient Elamite; at present it remains indecipherable and consequently 
far less is known about the early Elamite kingdom than would otherwise 
be the case. 

The Elamites early on adopted the practice of seal-making, a skill they 
shared with their Sumerian contemporaries. Elamite seals are exceptionally 
rich in design themes and in the skill which the seal-cutters demonstrate in 

96 



DILMUN, THE ANCIENT CULTURE OF THE GULF 

achieving their often very complex effects. Even more than their Sumerian 
colleagues, Elamite seal-cutters were remarkably able at bringing about 
positively monumental effects in a tiny compass. 49 

Many Elamite themes and designs were incorporated into Gulf seal forms, 
and Elamite influence was at least as considerable as Sumerian. But no one 
equalled the Elamites in making pictorial seals which show monumental 
buildings or scenes of ritual or of palace life. 

Many Gulf and east Arabian sites, of the third and second millennia in 
particular, yield quantities of a soft, easily carved stone which is frequently 
identified as soap stone or steatite but which is more accurately called chlorite. 
This is a dense, rather plastic-looking stone which varies in colour from 
brilliant green, through blue to grey and black. Its ease of handling meant 
that it was ideal for the manufacture of everyday containers, ones that, as it 
were, required mass-production because of the ubiquity of their use. 50 It has 
been demonstrated that much of the raw material required for this trade 
came from southern Persia and was traded through cities like those at Shahr- 
i Sokta and Tepe Yahya; there were also steatite mines in western Arabia and 
another source was near Yabrin. 51 The variety of forms and designs used by 
the chlorite craftsmen is very extensive but certain themes repeat themselves 
with remarkable persistence. The vessels used range from tiny household 
jars, many with side-lugs allowing them to be suspended, to huge ritual 
vessels with designs of complex and often extravagant pictorial detail. 

To what extent, if at all, there was contact directly between Elam in the 
east and Bahrain and the western Gulf littoral is uncertain. On the face of it 
there would certainly not seem to have been as much as with Sumer in the 
north and with the Indus Valley cities to the south and east. But with the 
amount of traffic which the Gulf must have borne, certainly in the second 
half of the third millennium and in the beginning of the second, it is difficult 
not to conclude that there must have been some regular and familiar contact. 
There are evidences of influences percolating into the Gulf from even further 
east and north (from the Caucasus and Transoxiana for example) and in all 
probability running through Elam. There was a temple at Susa, Elam's principal 
city, consecrated to Enshag, the tutelary divinity of Dilmun. 52 There may 
perhaps have been a colony of Dilmunites resident there. 

It has often been proposed that many of the western-Asiatic influences 
which become apparent in Egypt in late Predynastic times came in fact from 
Elam. The pear-shaped maces, whose changing form seemed to some 
commentators to mark the invasion of a new people in the Nile Valley, may 
be Elamite in origin; some of the elaborate ceremonial carving on votive 
palettes and knives may also come ultimately from the same inspiration. 53 

The extent of Elam's influence on the history of the societies of late fourth- 
and early third-millennium western Asia is still awaiting study and 
quantification. When this is done the degree to which that influence extended 
westwards to Egypt, if at all, will be better known, as will its contribution to 

97 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Dilmun. It may be recalled that it was suggested by no less a figure than Sir 
Flinders Petrie that the islanders of the Gulf may have been the carriers of 
Elamite and Mesopotamian influences to Egypt in the late Gerzean (Naqada 
II) period. 54 It was Petrie's view, one followed by several of his successors, 55 
that the 'dynastic race' entered Egypt and imposed its will over the Valley by 
force. The pear-shaped maces were, it was proposed, the weapons of the 
conquest. It seems very much more likely to the scholars of today that such 
influences as were transmitted entered Egypt peacefully, more probably 
brought by merchants than by warriors. 56 

The achievements of the people of Sumer were extraordinary: it is one of 
the injustices of history that they are still generally deprived of the credit for 
them. Their exceptional antiquity, reaching back to the very invention of 
history, has of course not helped them. The fact that, in a sense, they invented 
the means of history itself, by inventing writing, merely piles irony on 
unwarranted neglect. 



98 



THE POLITY OF 
THE ANCIENT GULF 



The one Sumerian sovereign of whom most people will have heard is 
Gilgamesh. 1 By his appearance in the story of Dilmun in an episode in the 
Epic story identified with him, which describes his quest for the flower of 
restored youth, he highlights the essentially mystical nature which that land 
enjoyed in the minds of the people of Sumer who lived during and after 
Gilgamesh's time. More than this, in the person of Gilgamesh of Uruk, 
Sumerian legend and historical reality come into conjunction. To the people 
of the land he remained one of the greatest of heroes throughout their existence 
and indeed beyond it, for he was a potent symbol to their Babylonian and 
Assyrian successors. His appeal, apart from the universal characteristics of 
his legend, seems to have rested upon the real achievements of his reign and 
the memory which the people retained of its glories. The exploits of later 
kings may also have contributed to it by being absorbed into the older legend. 



URUK 

The kings of Uruk are some of the better-documented of the earliest rulers of 
the Sumerian states. 2 The historical existence of Gilgamesh has been proven 
by the discovery of the records of temple-building in his name at Uruk and 
by the confrontation between himself and an historical king of Kish, Agga; 
he reigned c. 2700 BC. 3 Gilgamesh was preceded on the Uruk throne by his 
father, Lugalbanda, by Dummuzi-Tammuz (subsequently a god) and by 
Enmerkar, who seems to have been the first of the hero figures to catch the 
imagination of subsequent generations. It is, incidentally, likely that the 
Sumerians were the first people to have developed the concept of an heroic 
age, the time of these early kings, in much the way made familiar by the 
legends of the Mycenean age in Greece, the Northern sagas and the Vedas of 
India, many hundreds of years later. 

Uruk has provided some of the earliest surviving Sumerian documents 
referring to Dilmun and dating from well back into the fourth millennium. 
One of the earliest such references comes from a tablet, c. 3000 BC, 4 and 

99 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

appears to refer to a tax official. It is likely that at this time Dilmun meant 
eastern Arabia. 



THE KINGSHIP 

In the surviving texts relating to the reign of Gilgamesh, the record of a 
number of the characteristics associated with Sumerian kingship may be 
found. Kingship was an essentially practical function in Sumer and seems, in 
its early days at least, not to have been overlaid with any specifically mystical 
significance. Kings emerged comparatively late in the early period of Sumerian 
history. The king ruled but he did so by consent and frequently had to 
persuade his men of the Tightness of the course of action which he proposed. 
He probably descended from the war-band leader, appointed by the city or 
state in times of emergency. The levies of warriors which he led were always 
ready themselves to urge a policy on their sovereign and, clearly, he was 
obliged to take their representations into account, though not necessarily to 
accept them. The Sumerians were an independently minded people and 
were not usually prepared to abdicate absolute power to their kings, other 
than in times of crisis. 

The succession to the kingship seems generally to have been by the 
hereditary principle but most of the dynasties were short-lived, rarely lasting 
for much more than a century or so. The kingship could be assumed by 
humble citizens who, doubtless by the process of assassination or other 
political device, might be seen to manifest the favour of the city divinity, in 
whose hands the gift of kingship rested. A gardener is listed amongst the 
kings, as is a woman tavern-keeper. 

The Egyptians neatly solved the problem of the evident contradictions of 
monarchic rule as a political system by an absolute identification of king and 
god. It is difficult to argue with the administrative decisions of an immanent 
and divine ruler: treason and blasphemy become identical. Indeed, happy is 
the society which may see its god in the flesh every time he chooses to show 
himself, discharging his divine role in public. Much of the permanence and 
apparent changelessness of Egypt came from the sense of security which the 
king's divinity brought to the Two Lands: there, all was patently for the best 
in the best of all possible human situations. The Sumerians, who did not 
possess the same innocence of view which often typified the Egyptians at 
much the same time, did not have the comfort of knowing that God was 
living in a handsomely furnished white-walled building, only, as it were, a 
short distance down the road. Such was the happy case of the people of 
Memphis and of others of the early royal centres of Egypt. 

To the Sumerians, the concept of kingship was more significant than the 
person of the king. In the Sumerian phrase, 'kingship was handed down' from 
heaven, mirroring the system by which the divine world was organized: As 

100 



THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 

above, so below.' The king was originally conceived as little more than the 
overseer of the labour force required to farm the god's land. The gods recognized 
that their workers needed overseers and, therefore, kingship was delegated 
from heaven to earth: the king became, in the first place, the steward of a 
divine master. But in Sumer kingship seems also to have had its darker side. 



UR AND THE ROYAL TOMBS' 

Of all the cities of Sumer the most celebrated is Ur, first by reason of its 
Biblical celebrity and then because of the extraordinary discoveries of Sir 
Leonard Woolley. 5 Until the 1920s the mention of the city of Ur was inevitably 
followed by the Biblical epithet 'of the Chaldees' and it was pigeon-holed as 
the putative birthplace of Abraham, the Friend of God. This ancestor of the 
Semitic-speaking peoples of the Syro-Arabian desert, would have been a 
desert shaikh whose immediate forebears had migrated to the city probably 
at the beginning of the second millennium, amongst the waves of Semitic 
incursions which characterized all phases of Sumerian history. Ur, however, 
had been great long before Abraham, and the discovery of what may have 
been the tombs of the Sumerian kings in the city by Sir Leonard Woolley in 
1922 revealed its greatness in a startling, indeed in a chilling, manner. 6 

In the twelfth tablet of the series from which the most complete version of 
the Epic of Gilgamesh is drawn, there appears to be the description, in part, 
of the burial rites of a Sumerian king. 7 From this is seems that, sometimes at 
least, servants, courtiers and members of the royal family may have gone 
into the Underworld with the king, sacrificed to his royal eternity. Whilst this 
tablet does not really constitute a part of the Epic proper, it is particularly 
interesting in the light of Woolley's quite exceptional discoveries. 

After working in the ruins of Mesopotamian cities for many years, during 
which he greatly advanced the knowledge of Sumer's contribution to the 
world that succeeded it, Woolley discovered a number of complete burials 
of the Early Dynastic period at Ur, now dated to the middle of the third 
millennium BC, probably within a century or so of the reign of Gilgamesh, 
and just after the great pyramids were built at Gizeh in Egypt. One grave was 
contained in a deeply sunk pit and was very richly furnished with gold, 
silver, bronze, ivory and copper artefacts of a singular beauty and high 
craftsmanship. Goblets, cups, jewellery, regalia and the rich trappings of a 
powerful and luxurious court were released from their four and a half thousand 
years of entombment. What was even more remarkable was the discovery of 
the court itself, or at least some seventy-four members of it, who had been 
sacrificed and laid in orderly rows to wait upon the eternity of their sovereigns. 

The practice of such ritual sacrifice, by which individuals were put to 
death to accompany their chieftains into the darkness, is of great antiquity. 
It is a practice which is to be found in all historical periods over most areas 

101 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

of the world. It is still not unknown in Africa where, for example, thirty- 
two members of the court of Asantehene, the somewhat more than mortal 
paramount chief of the splendid Ashanti people of Ghana and the guardian 
of its collective soul, were clubbed to death in the tribal capital, Kumasi, 
only a little more than half a century ago on the death of the last but one 
holder of the office. Naturally, to the modern world which reckons the 
numbers of its sacrifices in millions, there is something particularly frightful 
in finding evidence of the deliberate slaying of seventy-odd courtiers, whose 
deaths were occasioned solely by religious belief and not by the demands 
of politics. 

The rationale of the practice is, of course, not difficult to see; usually the 
king so served also exercised a priestly function as the mediator between his 
people and their gods, and in this capacity he would be required to carry out 
complex and extended rituals to achieve the prosperity of the folk. Ceremonies 
invoking the gods, rites connected with the fecundity of herds, the fertility of 
the crops or the averting of natural disasters needed many participants and 
acolytes to the principal celebrant. Obviously any such ceremonies would 
be vastly more effective if they were performed in the presence of the gods 
whom they sought to influence; therefore, the king's closest assistants would 
be required to attend upon him and to assist him when he carried out the 
sacrifices in the afterlife. 

The contents of the great tombs at Ur inevitably came to be compared 
with Tutankhamun's, which was discovered earlier in the same decade. 
But the elegant daggers, the slender cups of gold, the great electrum helmet 
of Prince Meskalamdug, are so superlative in their simplicity and restraint 
of design, brilliantly compounded with the costliest materials, that they 
make the glitter of many of the sad little boy-pharaoh's often weirdly 
designed death-gifts seem more meretricious even than some of them really 
are. The contents of the Ur tombs are simply extraordinary, the most 
sumptuous ever made by any people. They are quite untypical of the general 
run of Sumerian work, even of the finest. Nothing that has survived from 
Sumer encourages the expectation of works of such quality. Only the art of 
the seals, some of which have the quality of jewels, has something of the 
same brilliance of form and design. But the objects in the tomb are really 
unparalleled and are witnesses to what must have been a culture of the 
most remarkable material splendour. It is difficult, however, to suppress 
the suspicion that the contents of the Ur tombs were not the sole unaided 
work of Sumerian craftsmen, though whence they may have come is quite 
beyond speculation. There is something altogether very un-Sumerian about 
the entire Ur experience. 

The Ur burials are mirrored by others in China, south of Peking, dating 
from the Shang dynasty, several centuries later. There is one important 
difference between the two, apart from the differences which ought to 
be expected to exist between two cultures so disparate in time and 

102 



THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 

place. The attendants in the Shang tombs have all been violently killed 
and the grave is in effect an execution site, a Bronze Age shambles. The 
tomb in Ur is at first sight even more chilling, and yet reflection may 
suggest otherwise; the members of the court who went to their deaths 
evidently did so willingly, without force being used upon them and 
without regret at leaving the world. There is evidence that they laid 
themselves down in the pit and that each one took a drug, presumably 
a narcotic or soporific, witnessed by the many small cups found in the 
tomb, which would ease their passing. When they were dead or 
unconscious, their bodies were neatly laid out to remove any evidence 
of the convulsions of death which they might experience; then the earth 
was brought down upon them, as they thought, for ever. One woman, it 
appears, was nearly late for her own funeral and lay down hastily amongst 
her companions. 

Altogether Woolley found sixteen 'Royal Tombs'. In one of them seventy- 
four courtiers were buried; in another, known as Pur Abi's (for a long time 
she was mistakenly called Shub-ad), there were seventeen. In the so-called 
'King's Tomb' (there is actually no evidence that the principal occupant was 
a king) there were fifty-nine bodies; Meskalamdug, he of the magnificent 
helmet, had forty companions. It would appear that the practice ran out after 
the examples in Ur. It is no more clear why it should have ceased than why 
the practice began in the first place or who introduced it. It must always be 
remembered that archaeology can only base its assumptions on the evidence 
before it. We do not know whether these ritual holocausts were practised in 
earlier times because there is no evidence yet found to indicate it. However, 
the references in the Gilgamesh Epic may suggest that they were part of 
Sumerian custom at an earlier date. 

It has been suggested that the persons who occupy the principal places in 
the Ur tombs may have been surrogates for the living princes, sacrificed at 
the end of the celebration of the hieros gamos, the sacred marriage of god 
and goddess enacted in Sumer on the upper platform of the ziggurat, the 
sacred mountain, to ensure the fertility and prosperity of the land. 8 There is 
no positive evidence to support this suggestion, but it does seem that the 
practice of the killing of a mock-king was known at other periods in 
Mesopotamian history. 

The ready acceptance of death by those who went with the main figures 
in the drama was warranted by the certainty of immortality as they waited 
upon their king in the eternal exercise of his office. It was a comforting 
doctrine to a people to whom the afterlife was a matter of deep uncertainty 
and it suggests a modification, at least for the period during which the practice 
was current, of the traditional Sumerian disbelief in any satisfactory afterlife 
at all. Generally speaking, the Sumerians, like their Semitic successors, believed 
that whatever fate awaited man after death, it offered little attraction. The 
souls of the dead were conceived as huddled together in dusty windswept 

103 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

corridors of some unamiable underworld where they were battered by the 
scaly wings of predatory birds. 

It may well be that the custom of the sacrifice of attendants on the principal 
occupants of the tomb, which seems to have been practised only for a short 
time, was foreign to Sumer and may therefore have been introduced by an 
alien dynasty. With all the rationalization in the world, however, it is still 
disturbing to think about the large and handsomely accoutred procession of 
men and women with the pack animals who would die with them, their 
harnesses and trappings jangling, winding its way down through Ur to the 
place of ceremonial death, one bright Sumerian morning. 

The kings of these early Sumerian states are shadowy figures and little is 
really known of them. Compared with their Egyptian contemporaries of the 
Archaic period and the early Old Kingdom, they are obscure indeed. 
Occasionally the record of a campaign, of a benefaction to a temple or the 
conclusion of a successful merchanting venture survives. 

The material and intellectual heritage of Sumer is so immense, however, 
whether in practical invention or in the creation of the world's first great 
literature, that we may presume that life in the little cities was, at this time, 
especially vibrant. In many respects the virility of the Sumerian experience 
at this time resembles that of the Italian cities of the Renaissance, with which, 
in political character as well, the Sumerian cities may to some degree be 
compared. 

However, conflicts between the little city-states and the resulting tensions 
continued unabated and eventually became insupportable; first one, then 
another enjoyed a brief spell of the paramountcy of Sumer, and dynasty 
followed insecure dynasty in the palaces of the land. The black-headed folk 
had always been a disputatious people. As the temple and city lands of one 
state became insufficient to support its people, or as the possessions of one 
divinity seemed disproportionately greater than another whose adherents 
coveted the riches of their neighbour, or as a palace servant seized the 
lugalship' from a failing master, so the pressures began to mount which 
eventually would lead to the collapse of the Sumerian state. 

Now another problem, though already a familiar one to all the cities, 
obtruded itself still more urgently into the consciousness of the people: the 
threat, ever present but now increasing, posed by the barbarous tribes which 
surrounded them. These were nomads of the desert or wild hillmen with no 
understanding of the fragile culture which the little cities had so patiently 
built up over the centuries, but with an unthinking envy of their material 
wealth. From all directions these restless and destructive hordes menaced 
Sumer, but the cities were unable to produce a common policy even to 
protect themselves. 



104 



THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 



SARGON OF AKKAD 



In the twenty-fourth century BC, the beginning of the end came for Sumer, and it 
was heralded by the emergence into history of one of the most remarkable men of 
the ancient world. But for the poverty of the surviving information about him, he 
would deserve to rank with the greatest political leaders of any era. Whilst he 
preserved for a time the fabric of the Sumerian way of life, he also introduced 
elements into the society which eventually made its destruction certain. For a 
century or so he created an empire which was wholly Sumerian in its manners and 
customs, although he himself was a civilized member of one of the barbarous 
desert hordes which pressed upon Sumer. He was a Semite, of those people who 
were to make so profound a contribution to the end of the Sumerian period. 

In the palace of Kish, the king Ur-Zababa had in his service as his cupbearer 
(an office of importance in the state and evidently not possessing the equivocal 
overtones associated with the same appointment, whose duties were 
discharged as frequently in a horizontal as in a vertical mode, in later, Greek 
monarchies) a young man who was to be known to history as Sharrukin, or 
Sargon. He was to prove a man of exceptional military ability, an outstanding 
administrator and a political innovator of genius. 

A fascinating legend about the birth and early life of Sargon has survived 
and it bears a remarkable resemblance to the legendary origins of another, 
later, and historically even more shadowy Semitic leader, Moses. In the text 
it is Sargon himself who is speaking: 

Sargon the Mighty King, King of Agade, am I. 

My mother was a changeling, my father I knew not. 

The brothers of my father loved the hills. 

My city is Azupiranu, which is situated on the banks of the Euphrates. 

My changeling mother conceived me, in secret she bore me. 

She set me in a basket of rushes, with bitumen she sealed my lid. 

The river bore me up and carried me to Akki, the drawer of water. 

Akki, the drawer of water, lifted me out as he dipped his ewer. 

Akki, the drawer of water, took me as his son and reared me. 

Akki, the drawer of water, appointed me as his gardener. 

While I was a gardener, Ishtar granted me her love. 

And for four and forty years I exercised kingship. 

The black-headed people I ruled, I governed. 

Mighty mountains with chip-axes of bronze I conquered. 

The upper ranges I scaled. 

The lower ranges I traversed. 

The sea lands three times I circled. 

Dilmun my hand captured. . . . 

Whatever king may come after me 

105 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Let him rule, let him govern the black-headed people. 

Let him conquer mighty mountains with chip-axes of bronze. 

Let him scale the upper ranges. 

Let him traverse the lower ranges. 

Let him circle the sea lands three times. 

Dilmun let his hand capture 

. . .from my city, Agade. 9 

There is more than bombast in these last lines; narrow-eyed menace seems 
to hiss down the more than forty centuries which separate Sargon from our 
own day. By this time (approximately 2370 BC) Dilmun was evidently so 
significant to anyone seeking the kingship of the land that its capture was a 
matter for pride, even for the man who was to be the mightiest conqueror of 
his time. But the inscription above was written at the end of his long and 
tempestuous reign and much was to be accomplished before he could boast 
that his hand had captured Dilmun. 

Sargon's master, Ur-Zababa, was attacked and evidently killed by the 
ambitious ruler of Umma, Lugalzaggesi, who had marched on Kish after 
razing to the ground the holy places of Lagash. Lugalzaggesi claimed the 
kingship of all Sumer, the first occasion on which a formal claim in terms of 
the 'Kingship of the Land' was made to the paramountcy; having evidently 
taken power in his own city, Sargon set out to avenge Ur-Zababa, and to 
destroy the usurper. He gathered an army together and attacked Uruk, where 
Lugalzaggesi had established himself; despite a powerful confederation 
brought in to defend the city, Sargon was victorious and Uruk fell. Lugalzaggesi 
apparently escaped when Sargon attacked, for the next we hear is of a pitched 
battle between the king's host and Sargon. Again, the Semite was totally 
victorious: he destroyed Lugalzaggesi's army and this time captured him. 
Nothing more is heard of Lugalzaggesi except that he was led before Sargon 
by the neck, 'haltered like a dog', and it may be assumed that his end came 
swiftly. 

Sargon now assumed the highest power and swept through Sumer, 
eliminating any pockets of resistance that were still loyal to Lugalzaggesi. 
Eventually he subdued not only the cities of Sumer but many of the lands 
which bordered it; he was forced to this course in order to check for a time 
the further incursion of the tribes from which he had himself come, and 
which menaced what had now become his extensive empire. After the 
subjugation of the Sumerian states, Sargon 'washed his weapons' in the waters 
of the Gulf, by this act perhaps demonstrating his claim to sovereignty over 
them and the lands which bordered them. It was now that he could set out 
on the conquest of the Holy Land of Dilmun. 

In the ruins of one of the principal sites of this period on Bahrain island, 
the Qala'at al-Bahrain, there is evidence of the abrupt destruction of the 
earliest settlement, here identified as City I, though, in fact, it was little more 

106 



THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 

than a village (see Chapter 7). 10 It has been speculated that its apparently 
insufficient defences were overthrown during Sargon's conquests and that it 
was his troops which carried the evidence of his power even to the sacred 
land of Dilmun. The next occupation level shows extensive ramparts around 
the new complex of buildings (City II), presumably to ensure that Sargon's 
governor or vassal prince was not so easily conquered as his predecessor in 
Dilmun's rule (see Chapter 7). 11 

Sargon's accession to the kingship of Sumer marks a fundamental change 
in the political organization of southern Mesopotamia. Hitherto each little 
state has been the be-all and end-all of its inhabitants' lives. Sargon was 
evidently an altogether more sophisticated politician than his predecessors 
in the Sumerian kingship, with the Semitic sense of race and kinship which 
he strongly evinced; he swept away, for the period of his empire, the little 
loyalties of each city and imposed instead the absolute sovereignty of the 
king. He moved closer to the concept of kingship that was characteristic of 
Egypt (although at this time without the direct identity between god and 
king which the Two Lands so successfully developed), making the office a 
manifestation of his own personal power, rather than the more metaphysical 
concept of a responsibility delegated from the gods. The Sumerians conceived 
kingship as transcending the human vicars who might temporarily exercise 
its power on behalf of their divine principals; Sargon made kingship a political 
reality and in doing so inaugurated the long line of oriental autocracies which 
ended with the deposition of the last Ottoman sultan. 

The empire which Sargon created, the first political entity in world history 
to warrant being so called, now entered upon a phase of unexampled 
splendour and power. As if to mark the fact that a new period of Near Eastern 
history had been inaugurated, Sargon decided to build a new capital, away 
from the traditional cities of Sumer. The place he chose came to be known as 
Agade (the Akkad of the Bible) and whilst its exact site is now unknown it 
was located somewhere in the vicinity of Kish, near the neck of the two 
rivers, strategically one of the most important positions in all Mesopotamia, 
as the cities built there by successive rulers after Sargon testify. It would be 
pleasant to think that this choice of site for his new city might demonstrate a 
streak of sentiment in Sargon, that he should decide to build his own 
magnificent city within the sight of the lesser one from which, as a relatively 
minor official, he had started out on his great chain of conquests: more likely 
it was evidence of his powerful command of the site's strategic potential. In 
any event, its selection represents the first evidence in Sumer's history of the 
movement towards the north which was to influence both the political and 
economic directions of the Middle East from the later centuries of the third 
millennium onwards, and which was to result in the axis of world 
communications being shifted away from the Gulf to the Mediterranean. 

Soon Agade was the most powerful and gorgeous city of the time, and 
into its harbours sailed ships bearing tribute and merchandise from the four 

107 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

corners of the world, of which Sargon claimed the sovereignty amongst his 
titles. An inscription survives in which Sargon speaks proudly of the ships of 
Dilmun riding fearlessly at anchor in the harbour of Agade, some measure 
evidently of the power that now he exercised and of the peace which he had 
brought to the Near Eastern world: 

Sargon, King of Kish, was victorious in thirty-four campaigns and 
dismantled all the cities as far as the shore of the sea. At the wharf of 
Agade he made moor ships from Meluhha, ships from Magan and ships 
from Dilmun. . . . Enlil did not let anyone oppose Sargon the King. 5,400 
soldiers ate daily in his palace. 12 

This extract is from an inscription on a statue, probably from the period 
following Sargon's reign. 

Though he came from the desert Sargon evidently understood the 
importance of trade to the Sumerian nation and to the prosperity of the 
cities. The emperor (Sargon is the first historical figure who perhaps justifies 
that title) was always sharp-eyed in the protection of his merchants' trade 
routes and was quick to punish any marauders or those jealous princes who 
might menace the free movement of trade across the wide sweep of lands 
that came under his imperium. 

Sargon was, by all reports, a devout follower of the gods of Sumer and, 
like other arriviste conquerors after him, he saw as his destiny the honourable 
preservation of the wonders of the world he had inherited and of the worship 
of its gods. Sargon's empire preserved much of the best of Sumer but at the 
price of its becoming virtually entirely Semitic in language, administration 
and influence, thus paving the way for the later Babylonian and Assyrian 
empires, which were its eventual successors. These, too, were Semitic states, 
though they preserved, like Sargon, much of the essential qualities of Sumerian 
culture, manners and beliefs. 

Sargon appointed his own relations and members of the Semitic tribes to 
many of the most powerful positions in the state. There was, no doubt, an 
element of policy as well as nepotism in this, for Sargon probably recognized 
that in the long term it would be hopeless to try to hold back the growing 
involvement of the tribes in the affairs of Sumer; he may have persuaded 
himself that a policy of involving the desert peoples in the management of 
the state would prepare more of them for the responsibilities of empire and 
subdue their destructive and unthinking envy of Sumerian culture. On the 
other hand, he may simply have liked to have his relations around him. 

It may be that this policy worked, for when the reckoning with the tribes 
came it was not the Semites who overwhelmed his empire but the Guti, a 
tribe of equal barbarity and even greater ferocity, who surged down on 
Sargon's state, probably from the Zagros mountains in the east. The Guti 
were a people 'which brooks no control'. They came from the region that 

108 



THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 

was later to nourish the Kassites, another of the successor nations to Sumer's 
greatness and, later still, in the first millennium BC, the centre of the remarkable 
metal-working and horse-loving people of Luristan. Anarchy and desolation 
followed the Guti invasion, which had apparently been brought down on 
the land to avenge some dreadful but unspecified sacrilege perpetrated by 
Sargon's grandson, Naram-Sin. It was Enlil himself, the ruler of the High 
Gods, who called the Guti, 'the Mountain Dragon', down upon Agade. The 
once glorious city was utterly destroyed and over its ruins the gods in their 
wrath uttered a terrifying curse. 13 The people who once slaughtered animals 
for sacrifice are willed to 'murder their wives instead of slaying sheep'; the 
hope is expressed that they may slaughter their children and, in the case of 
the poor, specifically to drown them. Agade,' the curse proclaims, 'may your 
palace built with a joyful hand be turned into a depressing ruin.' It concludes 
on a baleful note: 'Who says "I will lie down in Agade" will not find a good 
sleeping place.' 

The curse seems to have worked, for to this day the site of the golden city 
so proudly built by Sargon the Great King, the King of the World, is 
undiscovered, buried beneath the debris of the Mesopotamian plain and the 
anger of the gods. 



UR-NANSHE AND GUDEA OF LAGASH 

With the exception of Ur, the Sumerian city-state which is perhaps most 
generally remembered today is Lagash, in the south-eastern part of the land. 
Its modern celebrity derives from the many statues, scattered over the world's 
museums, of one of its rulers, known to us as Gudea, who reigned at the end 
of the third millennium. 14 

Lagash, however, emerged into prominence several centuries before 
Gudea, at the time when Sumer was still powerful. It would seem that the 
city was not one of those which bore a special mystical significance to the 
peoples of the time, as many cities did, for a record of its sovereigns does not 
appear in the surviving king-lists. One of the early rulers of Lagash was Ur- 
Nanshe, who governed the city in the middle of the twenty-sixth century 
before our era. His inscriptions, of which many survive, are particularly 
interesting in the present context in that they record the bringing of tribute 
from far distant countries to him, borne to Lagash 'by the ships of Dilmun'. 
Ur-Nanshe's inscription is now some 4,500 years old. It is apparent that 'the 
ships of Dilmun' had, in his time, become a symbol of a wide-ranging maritime 
power, rather like the 'hearts of oak' in the popular English ballad. 

Later, when Sargon's empire was destroyed by the barbarous Guti, Lagash 
became for a time the most important Mesopotamian city-state, for the 
conquerors seem to have favoured its rulers, an early example perhaps of 
the fruits of collaboration with the occupying forces. The dynasty which 

109 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

came to power, by accommodating itself with the wild men who were now 
in command of Sumer's destiny, is largely memorable because of Gudea, its 
second king. If the dynasty is to be judged by Gudea's many surviving portraits, 
it was a worthy, solid family, rather bourgeois in appearance, with a firm 
approach to the business of managing the splendid heritage which the 
capricious gods of Sumer and the intervention of the Guti had handed to 
them. 

Gudea would not have felt out of place at the Tudor courts, even if he 
was, to his credit, substantially less shifty-eyed than so many of the members 
of those dubious assemblies. Certainly, as for the Tudor kings, trade was a 
principal concern for Gudea; quite properly so, since much of Sumer's 
splendour depended upon the importation of the raw materials and 
merchandise that were needed to embellish the court and the temples of the 
gods. 

Gudea listed proudly the merchandise which flowed into his city, recording 
that much of it was trans-shipped from Dilmun, where it was brought from 
many lands. The ships brought to him gold from Egypt and Anatolia, silver 
from the Amanus, copper from the Zagros, ironite from Egypt, carnelian 
from Ethiopia, and from Dilmun itself, timber. 

In the reigns of his successors, there are reports that copper utensils, lapis 
lazuli, tables inlaid with ivory and other ivory objects, combs, breastplates 
and boxes, ornaments for furniture and semi-precious stones were commonly 
to be found in Dilmun's market-places. Then there are reports of other imports 
from Dilmun, no less essential than gold and ivory to the life of a rich and 
prosperous city: the island's onions and dates which were famous throughout 
the ancient Near East, and what the Sumerian texts refer to as 'fish-eyes'. 15 It 
is generally agreed that this term signifies pearls. Pearling was, until recently, 
an important industry in Bahrain and the Gulf, although it is now in decline. 
Oyster middens, mounds of discarded oyster shells, have been found on the 
island which date back beyond historic times. 16 



THE FALL OF SUMER 

Gudea's dynasty was eventually overthrown by a brilliant usurper of the 
throne of Ur, whose previous ruler had broken the power of the Guti. Without 
the invaders' support, the Lagashite dynasty fell to the newcomer, Ur-Nammu, 
who ushers in the last of the great periods of Sumerian history, the third and 
final dynasty of Ur. 

Ur-Nammu was one of the outstanding rulers of Sumer, a capable 
administrator and military leader, a builder and, perhaps more important 
than any of these, the promoter of a legal code which regulated man's conduct 
to his fellows and the state, and anticipated the more famous code of 
Hammurabi by several hundred years. 17 In law, as in so many other 

110 



THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 

departments of life which today are taken for granted, the Sumerians seem 
to have been the innovators. But despite its brilliance, his reign was a short 
one: Ur-Nammu seems to have possessed the kingship for only nine years; 
he was then killed in one of the battles that Sumerian leaders had constantly 
to face. The portrait which survives of him shows him as delicate of feature, 
sensitive in appearance. 

One of the most splendid sequences in Sumer's history began with the 
accession to the kingship of Sumer and Akkad of Ur-Nammu's son, Shulgi, in 
the year 2095 BC. His reign was to be long and glorious; when he died in 
2048 BC he had created an empire as extensive as Sargon's and, in many 
ways, more integrated and coherent. It was a time of great ziggurat building, 
the remains of some of them, built in Shulgi's time, standing to this day. 

Shulgi, like his father, was a notable law giver, always one of the most 
creditable activities of Sumerian sovereigns, and a distinguished soldier who 
extended far afield the influence of his empire and of his capital city. His 
family seems to have been of a strong religious bent, manifested both by 
their extensive programme of temple building and by the thoroughly 
unSumerian practice of proclaiming themselves to be divine. A state cult, 
involving offerings to the statues of the king and the naming of one of the 
months of the calendar in his honour, was introduced and is reminiscent of 
Roman practices under the Principate. Shulgi is commemorated in one of the 
principal texts to survive from this time: it describes the sacred marriage (the 
hieros gamos) and contains passages reminiscent of the Song of Solomon, 
that ecstatic invocation of the splendours of the beloved. In it Shulgi is 
addressed in terms of the most passionate longing by the priestess, with 
whom he was to enact one of the most important of Sumerian religious 
festivals, ensuring the fertility of the year. 

An inscription of Shulgi's reign records the king having sent a royal 
messenger to Dilmun, Ur-Dumuzi, to bring home two invalid officials, a 
perhaps not altogether usual example of royal concern at so early a time. 18 At 
his death, the venerable Shulgi was succeeded first by one son and then by 
another, Shu-sin (2038-2030 BC). In common with the other members of his 
family, Shu-sin was divine but he had rather more problems to test both his 
divinity and his statesmanship than his predecessors had. The nomads of the 
Syrian desert on the western borders of the empire were once more stirring 
and for the rest of the dynasty's rule, and indeed for more than a thousand 
years afterwards, constant incursions of fierce Semitic tribesmen (amongst 
whom may have been Abraham and his followers) continued to harry the 
foundations of the Sumerian state and those of its successors. Dilmun once 
more appears in the archives of this time, when one of Shu-sin's officials, 
Arad-Nanna, lists amongst his titles 'Prefect (gir-nita) of Dilmun', 19 the first 
of the elements in his name prefigures one of Dilmun-Bahrain's own later 
names. It was around this time that the richest period of Dilmun's trading 
empire flourished with Ur as its headquarters. 

Ill 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

A peculiarity of the house of Ur-Nammu was its burial customs which are 
unlike those of other Sumerian dynasts. Large, richly furnished tomb chambers 
built deep in the ground contained the bodies of the kings of this time which 
recall the royal burials of Early Dynastic Egypt and of the Royal Tombs at Ur, 
though without the human sacrifices which attended those interments. It is 
possible that the Third Dynasty burials were associated with the rites of 
Dumuzi, the Sumerian god of vegetation and rebirth who, as a dying god 
ruling over the Underworld, has many parallels with the Egyptian Osiris, 
with whom later Pharaohs were identified in death. 

Like most of the dynasties founded on the rule of the agglomeration of 
city-states with its constant round of intrigue, power politics and decline, 
that created by Ur-Nammu was not destined to last for very long. With its fall, 
and apart from one or two uneasy and temporary survivals, the end of Sumer 
must be recorded, after a period of nearly 2,000 years during which time its 
peoples had given more of importance to the world than ever did any nation 
of antiquity other than Egypt. But by now the land of Sumer was exhausted. 

For too long the society had sought to withstand the friction of the different 
cities, the unpredictability of the two rivers between which they had first 
tried to build a nation, and the constant onslaught of barbaric and envious 
tribes on every frontier. Unlike Egypt, for which some of its most splendid 
times were just dawning and which would take another 1,500 years to exhaust 
its strength, Sumer had too volatile and fragile a structure to withstand the 
pressures which were mounting within and around it. The world, however, 
was fortunate that a ruler of the northern city of Babylon, a Semitic prince 
named Hammurabi, with something of Sargon about him, succeeded 
eventually to Sumer's empire. At his accession, around 1750 BC, the history 
of Sumer ends and that of Babylon begins. It is the peculiar glory of Babylon 
that she conserved much of Sumer's legacy to the world, which still draws a 
handsome dividend from it to this day. It is from this period, c. 1740 BC, that 
the last mention of Dilmun appears in the records, in the context of the 
copper industry. 

With the absorption of Mesopotamian culture by the Semitic speaking 
peoples who had incorporated the immense legacy which the Sumerians 
(and then the Semitic Akkadians) had bequeathed, the Sumerians themselves 
now pass from history, their very existence eventually to be forgotten. But 
this gentle people, energetic, often bewildered, perpetually creative, inventive 
seemingly beyond even the customary boundaries of genius, often fearful 
but never wholly despairing, may seem closer to us than most ancient peoples, 
precisely because they display so intense a quality of humanity. The 
monuments which they left behind were not only, or even principally, of 
stone or precious metals, but were words, images, concepts and ideas which 
have deeply influenced the life of every civilized man who ever lived in the 
lands which draw their intellectual origins from western Asia. The magnitude 
of the achievements of Sumer, like those of its contemporary, Egypt, down 

112 



THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 

to the end of the third millennium, can only be measured when it is realized 
that, when their high and elegant cultures were flourishing, the rest of the 
world was virtually empty of anything even remotely approaching civilization. 
Although Sumer's days were over and her name survived only as an archaic 
formula in the titularies of some of the more antiquarian-minded sovereigns 
of the later Mesopotamian states, her influence was never wholly lost, for the 
successor states retained much of her heritage. But before examining the 
outline of Mesopotamia's post-Sumerian history it may be pertinent to take a 
view of the world as it was at the end of the Sumerian period when, as we 
reckon historical time, the second millennium before the present era was 
beginning. 



THE SECOND MILLENNIUM 

The processes of change once again began to accelerate, as they had done 
so remarkably at the end of the fourth millennium. Even Egypt, seemingly 
imperturbable if not eternal, experienced the shock of a brutal disruption of 
her tranquil way of life. The first and greatest period of her dynastic history 
ended with a collapse into chaos and anarchy after the nearly interminable 
reign of Pepi II, who doddered on into the ninety-fourth year of his kingship, 
having been proclaimed Lord of the Two Lands when he was 6 years old. 
The rule of god-kings works admirably when they are in possession of their 
faculties; a senile divinity is both politically and philosophically an appalling 
concept. The long years of Pepi's reign, when the great-grandsons of the 
men who watched his coronation were old before its end, must have made 
some of his more conscientious courtiers long for the days when the god 
had been sent back to rule other gods, before the decline of his powers 
could prejudice his rule of men. 

After a long and harrowing period in which famine, anarchy and a total 
disregard for all the most respected Egyptian values stalked the banks of the 
Nile, order was painfully restored by the austere and dedicated Pharaohs of 
the early Middle Kingdom. Peace returned to the Valley; Egypt regained her 
soul and the successive Montuhotpes, Amenemhets and Senwosrets added 
new splendour to the majesty of the Two Lands. Then new pressures began 
to bear upon Egypt and a weak, increasingly decentralized monarchy in the 
shadowy Thirteenth Dynasty let power and resources ebb away and, an 
unheard-of calamity, Egypt was invaded by a Semitic people related to those 
who had already assumed the sovereignty in Mesopotamia. The 'Hyksos' 
princes (who used to be called, charmingly but as it happens quite inaccurately, 
the Shepherd Kings) seem never to have been entirely happy ruling this 
mysterious and, to foreigners, bewildering land. They tried anxiously to adopt 
Egyptian ways and to gain the acceptance of the people, but settling self- 
consciously in the Delta, where they could feel that their ancestral Syrian 

113 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

and Arabian deserts were not so very far away, they never wholly penetrated 
Egyptian life. Probably undeservedly, they were cursed with unparalleled 
vituperation and hatred when finally they were expelled by a family of Theban 
nobles whose chief was exasperated by the presence of aliens upon the 
throne of the sacred land. Rising against the usurping kings, he restored the 
rule of the gods and the prosperity of his house. The long late summer of 
Egyptian greatness now began with the creation of her magnificent, luxurious 
and paradoxical empire — for, deep in her heart, Egypt still distrusted all that 
lay beyond her frontiers — which exalted the throne of the Pharaohs of the 
New Kingdom high above all other thrones in the world. 

In other lands, the wheel of change was revolving irresistibly. In the west, 
Crete was inaugurating her domination of the Mediterranean and a distinctive 
if, later, somewhat neurotic culture, many elements of which were probably 
Asiatic in origin. Far to the north, the early cities of Troy were built to guard 
the route which linked the Aegean with the Black Sea, on whose shores wild 
savages with discouraging habits roamed in search of human prey. Across 
the mass of European lands, as far as the islands in the North Sea which, 
shrouded in mist and fog, were known if at all only by legend and the 
discounted reports of occasional travellers, new people were moving, seeking 
new pastures or the protection of new gods. In Greece, a new race came 
down from the north with different gods and broad, handsome faces, whose 
gold-masked chiefs were buried on the windswept and menacing hill at 
Mycenae. The great ports of the Syrian coast sent argosies to Egypt and Crete 
and wherever a profit might be made. 

In Mesopotamia, too, profound changes were in train. The final 
disappearance of the old Sumerian states and the dominance of the Semitic 
rulers meant a shift away from the south and the creation of northern 
kingdoms, first in Babylon and then Assyria, which looked to the 
Mediterranean lands, those of the Upper Sea, as their natural outlet for 
conquest and trade. In time the southern cities of Sumer, once the most 
important in the world, declined to the level of simple village settlements 
and so most of them have remained to this day. Occasionally a ruler with a 
taste for history or in the hope of pleasing the almost forgotten gods, would 
build a temple or repair a ziggurat. But most of the cities disappeared, buried 
beneath the mounds of dust and sand which, wind-blown, piled over them 
and hid them until the modern world, happily more careful of its ancestry 
than were its own ancestors, painstakingly uncovered them. 

In the middle of the second millennium a series of spectacular cataclysms 
overwhelmed much of the ancient world. In the Mediterranean the eruption, 
as it is now believed, of Santorini brought down the cities of Crete, admitting 
both the harsh Achaeans to the island's splendid palaces and, in all probability, 
the myth of Atlantis into the modern world. Somewhat earlier, in what is 
today the state of Pakistan, the mighty civilization of the Indus Valley, including 
the powerful cities of Harappa and Moenjo-Daro, collapsed, from whatever 

114 



THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 

cause. The impact of these events was brutal and absolute. In what had once 
been Sumer the poet lamented piteously: 'Who was King? Who was not 
King?' 

As the political and economic axis of the world began to shift to the north, 
so the Gulf too declined in importance. Bereft of its main market by the 
destruction of the Indus Valley cities and with the establishment of caravan 
routes more reliable and better policed than in the early days, the Lower Sea 
became, literally, a backwater. 

Dilmun had witnessed many changes of political control in Mesopotamia 
and always her religious and commercial appeal, then as now an irresistible 
combination, ensured her prosperity. Now, however, it was different, for her 
commercial significance seems to have been destroyed by the collapse of 
the great Indus Valley cities which were the outlet for much of Sumer's 
merchandise and the decline of the southern Mesopotamian cities. From this 
time onwards, Dilmun ceases to be important; only occasionally does a 
mention of it appear in the ancient sources and then it sinks into an obscurity 
from which Bahrain and the other Gulf states have only tentatively emerged 
in this century. Certainly, never again would it occupy the special place that 
it did for the Sumerians and their immediate successors. Already the world 
had begun to change and the decline of Dilmun's commercial significance 
even produced a decline in her legendary status as the island of the gods. 
Soon the Sumerians themselves were forgotten and only occasionally was 
Dilmun noticed, for now it was merely a distant province of whatever power 
ruled Mesopotamia. 



THE AHLAMU STEAL THE DATES 

In the fourteenth century BC, during the reign of Burnaburriyas, a 
contemporary of that odd-looking religious innovator Akhenaton of Egypt, 
two letters were sent by the incumbent governor of Dilmun, Ili-ippasra, to 
his colleague in Babylonia, then ruled by the Kassites, of which the island 
was a province. 20 Ili-ippasra was evidently a man of substance: his daughter 
was at school in Nippur, one of the ancient centres of Sumerian learning and 
the study of the gods which, even in these relatively late times, was clearly 
the place to send one's children to be educated, girls as much as boys. The 
school was evidently reserved for the children of the aristocracy. Ili-ippasra's 
daughter was suffering from an inflamed nostril and the headmaster wrote to 
him in Dilmun to assure him that she was well on the way to recovery. This 
correspondence is especially interesting for it throws a light on a number of 
characteristics which had come to be identified with Dilmun historically and 
which confirm its association at this time with the principal Bahrain island. 
Extensive evidence has been discovered in the Al-Hajjar graves in Bahrain 21 
of the period during which the island was under Kassite domination; it suggests 

115 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

that circumstances in the islands were much more prosperous than had 
appeared to be the case. 

It is apparent from the text of the first letter (Ni6l5) that the writer is 
awaiting a 'Sutean woman' to cross the water and visit him. From this it 
may be deduced that the writer is living on the mainland of Arabia, which, 
at this as at other times, was included in the term 'Dilmun', which thus 
becomes the name of a substantial region, far exceeding the confines of 
the island itself. However, it is reasonably certain, from the evidence of 
City III at the Qala'at al-Bahrain, where the remains of the Kassite occupation 
have produced quantities of their rather unattractive pottery as well as 
some as yet unpublished cuneiform tablets, that Bahrain was the capital of 
what might be thought of as the Dilmun province in Kassite times. The 
writer knows that the Sutean woman has reached Dilmun proper, in other 
words, Bahrain, but has not yet crossed the straits to the mainland. The 
Sutean woman is a mysterious figure but it is known that in many of the 
north-east Arabian tribal groups of this and later times women were powerful, 
often as priestesses, even as queens. 

To Ililiya speak! This is what Ili-ippasra thy brother said: Unto thee be 
well-being! May Inzag and Meskilak, the gods of Tilmun, guard thy life! 

Iltam who will arrive, I have met. Also the Sutean woman has crossed 
the sea and she will arrive. Of the coming of this Sutean woman I am 
not so sure. Now I have directed her to Babil. Before the month of 
Epuly draws to a close she will reach there. Around me the Ahlamu 
have carried away the dates, thus with me there is nothing I can do. 
But a single town must not be allowed to be pillaged. In the town 
which I am living in when from Sin-nun I heard and the temple I heard 
about is the old house of Nin [. . .] the house was old and had collapsed. 
Now he has done nothing at all he let it go. And from that day on they 
keep on seeing dreams and the destruction of the palace has been 
indicated for the fifth time. 22 

The writer complains that the Ahlamu have carried off the dates, evidently 
stored ready for shipment back to Mesopotamia. The dates of Dilmun were 
always specially favoured in ancient times and probably the best of them 
came from the oases of Qatif and Hofuf in Saudi Arabia, another indication 
of the likely extent of Dilmun's territories in this period. In the ruins of 
Qala'at al-Bahrain (City III) extensive storerooms have been found which 
suggest that they were used for the warehousing of dates before they were 
shipped and also for the pressing of date juice, which, when fermented, 
produced an agreeable and very intoxicating drink. 

In both letters the texts are preceded by a benediction in which Inzak (the 
Sumerian Enshag), the guardian god of Dilmun, is invoked with a goddess, 

116 



THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 

Meskilak, the Lady of Pure Decrees. She was a divinity most appropriate for 
Dilmun, for one of its epithets was the Land of Pure Decrees. 

The first letter contains a reference to the antiquity of certain temples in 
Dilmun and to their deplorable state of disrepair. Where the text mentions 
'the house of Nin..,' it is tempting to restore the missing word to read 
'Ninkhursag' or 'Ninsikilla', both of them patrons of the island. Prophecies 
about the destruction of the 'palace' are also reported in conjunction with 
the unruly behaviour of the thieving Ahlamu and indicate the generally 
anarchic situation which prevailed in the Gulf at this time as a result of the 
depredations of the Badu tribes. 

The second letter is less informative than the first, but still complains of 
the difficulties which the Kassite administration was experiencing at the hands 
of the Ahlamu. 

To Ililiya speak! This is what Ili-ippasra, thy brother said: Unto thee be 
well-being! May Inzag and Meskilak, the deities of Tilmun, guard thy 
life! The Ahlamu certainly talk to me only of violence and plunder: of 
conciliation they do not talk with me. The lord put it upon me to ask 
them, but they did not comply. 23 

These two letters are important for their references to two peoples, the 
Suteans and the Ahlamu, whose descendants are in all probability the Arab 
tribes of the Gulf and Saudi Arabia today. 24 

Both groups were nomadic Badu who constantly harassed the settled 
communities on the shores of the Gulf and in the nearby oases, like those 
from which Dilmun's dates came. The Suteans were originally drawn from 
the area between Mari and Qatna, well to the north of Mesopotamia in Syria, 
a region in which the Semitic and Sumerian strains in Mesopotamian culture 
possibly were first integrated. Contact was established but frequently the 
tribes got out of hand and had to be put down severely. At the end of the 
fifteenth century BC the king of Babylon gave instructions for the extermination 
of the Suteans, but they survived, no doubt by withdrawing into the desert, 
which was always a hopeless obstacle to town-bred soldiers. 

The pressures of the desert peoples, the Badu as they would be called 
today, were a constant problem to the cities and settled people of the Gulf, 
as they were to the cities of Mesopotamia. It is altogether likely that the 
original decision to move the centre of Dilmun from the mainland in the 
middle of the third millennium to the Bahrain islands was forced on the 
Dilmunites by the activities of the Bedu. At least with 30 kilometres (20 
miles) or so of water separating Bahrain from the mainland the people, their 
gods and the merchandise which they traded could be safe. 

The Ahlamu were a long-established tribal group, formed originally perhaps 
by the occasional confederation of those nomads who constantly disturbed 
the peace of states from Syria to the Gulf. They were, in all probability, 

117 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

ancestral to the Aramaeans, who secured a powerful place for themselves in 
the later history of the region and who, by the eighth century BC, formed an 
important linguistic family, to the extent that Aramaic became eventually the 
common language of much of the Near East. The Arabs themselves, another 
linguistic family closely related to the groups already mentioned, are first 
recorded in the Assyrian annals of the ninth century BC. The Semitic elements 
which, throughout Sumer's history, alternately menaced and, by adopting so 
many of its institutions, sustained the land came out of the Syro-Arabian 
deserts, like the nomads who still, though in diminishing numbers, live in 
the desert to this day. 

Surveys in central Arabia have identified numerous rudimentary sites which 
may be attributed to a 'proto-Bedouin' period. By the ninth to seventh centuries 
BC the Assyrian records of campaigns in northern Arabia show that fully 
developed camel-herding Arab tribes were already in existence. These tribes 
were probably the direct descendants of the earlier Ahlamu'. 25 

The correspondence addressed to Ililiya in Babylon is one of the few 
evidences of a concern with the affairs of the south to survive from the 
troubled centuries which followed the collapse of Hammurabi's dynasty in 
Mesopotamia. From this time onwards, Dilmun's history becomes increasingly 
obscure. The world had expanded enormously since the days of the Sumerians 
and there were more rewarding markets and richer civilizations to conquer 
than small islands and barren tracts of desert on the coast along the Gulf. 



DILMUN'S LATER HISTORY 

Occasionally Dilmun (or, more accurately, Tilmun, since the languages which 
speak of it were Semitic) is mentioned in the dismal recital of conquest and 
repression which characterizes the history of the kings of later Babylonia 
and Assyria, the latter being arguably the most repellent of all the princes of 
the ancient Near East. Thus Tukulti-Ninurta I, one of the greatest warrior- 
kings of Assyria, who reigned from 1242 to 1206 BC, conquered Babylon, 
dragged its king in chains to his capital at Assur and went on to absorb the 
whole of the land that had been Sumer. Dilmun became subject to him and 
he proclaimed himself 'King of Sippur and Babylon, King of Dilmun and the 
country Melukhkha, King of the Upper and Lower Seas, King of all mountain 
regions and the deserts'. 26 Tukulti-Ninurta's barbaric reign ended appropriately 
when he was assassinated by his own son. 

In the annals of Sargon II, the king of Assyria who reigned from 721 to 705 
BC, nearly 2,000 years after his namesake, the great Emperor of Agade, there is 
mention of one of the few kings of Dilmun whose name is known: Uperi, who 
lives like a fish in the midst of the sea of the rising sun'. 27 This reference to the 
Sea of the Rising Sun echoes the similar terms which were used of the Gulf and 
Dilmun in some of the earliest references in the epic works of the Sumerians. 

118 



THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 

Islands were often said to be, reasonably enough, 'in the midst of the 
sea'; it was an expression commonly used by Assyrian monarchs of island 
nations which they conquered in the Mediterranean or in the Gulf. Uperi 
may seem to be dismissed rather contemptuously by his self-proclaimed 
suzerain, though 'like a fish' could, just possibly, recall a fish cult which 
was associated with Dilmun and its earliest divinity, Enki. Dilmun, in Sargon 
IPs time, as in the days of Burnaburiyas, probably covered much of the 
eastern Arabian coast, possibly including Kuwait. One of the names of 
Bahrain in pre-Islamic times was Samak which, curiously, means 'fish' in 
Arabic: it may be that the principal island's shape, a roughly extended 
oval, suggested the form of a fish. 

In 694 BC Sennacherib was king of Assyria and renowned — at least in 
Byron's recension — for his attack upon Jerusalem. He also conquered Elam 
in the south-west of Persia; like many of his forebears, he attacked and 
overthrew Babylon and it is reported that the debris from the sacking of the 
city floated down the Gulf to the shores of Dilmun. 28 This improbable 
circumstance so intimidated the island's inhabitants that they quickly swore 
allegiance to the Great King. 

The king of Dilmun of the day, whose name is unknown, evidently 
considered it politic to demonstrate his adherence to Sennacherib's interest 
more positively than by the mere expression of loyalty. He sent a team of 
labourers to assist in the razing of Babylon after the city had fallen to the 
Assyrians. They brought with them the tools which are described as typical 
of their country, 'bronze spades and bronze pikes'. Metal-working, even at 
this late date, was evidently still one of the most readily recognized 
characteristics of Dilmun, as it had been in Sumerian times when Dilmun 
was the centre of the copper trade. 

From late Assyrian times comes a most curious text, which was published 
originally in a study of Chaldaean astrology. This purports to be an astrological 
prediction which forecasts a disaster for an unnamed king of Dilmun. 29 The 
prediction links the fate of various kings to eclipses of the moon in different 
months. The relevant parts of the prediction read: 

Contemplate its eclipse, a decision will be given for the King of Dilmun. 
Someone will kill the King of Dilmun during an uprising, a stranger 
will ascend the throne. If the eclipse takes place on the 15th day someone 
will kill the King of Dilmun during an uprising, a stranger will ascend 
the throne. 

If the eclipse takes place on the 16th day then the King will be killed 
during his procession, a fool will ascend the throne. 

No date is known for the origin of this mysterious piece of astrological 
forecasting. One commentator 30 has suggested that some of the other events 
with which it seems to deal relate to the troubled and dangerous times when 

119 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

the Guti, the wild tribes from the mountains dividing Sumer from Iran, 
swarmed down on Sumer and wrought such devastation. 

The brutal and relentless Assyrians tore up the established order in the 
Near East and imposed their harsh absolutism upon all the lands that came 
under their influence. The inscriptions of the Assyrian kings are catalogues 
of terror and oppression. In the early years of the seventh century, 
Sennacherib's son Esarhaddon lists Dilmun high amongst his conquests and 
supplies us with the name of another Dilmunite king. 

Upon Qanaia, King of Tilmun, I imposed tribute, due to me as his 
lord. 31 

Later still, Assurbanipal (668-631 BC) proclaims his power by assuming 
some of the most ancient royal titles which recall the titulary of Sargon the 
Great, from nearly 2,000 years earlier. Now Tilmun appears as one of the 
boundaries of his empire and is used by him to demonstrate the extent of the 
world that he ruled. Interestingly, he mentions Tilmun and Tyre in the same 
context, identifying them as comparable entities, the one in the Upper Sea 
(the Mediterranean) and the other in the Lower (the Gulf). 

Assurbanipal, the Great King, the legitimate King, the King of the world, 
King of Assyria, King of all the four rims of the earth, King of Kings, 
prince without rival, who rules from the Upper Sea to the Lower Sea, 
had made bow to his feet all the other rulers and who has laid the yoke 
of his overlordship upon them from Tyre which is an island in the 
Upper Sea as far as Tilmun which is an island in the Lower Sea — and 
they pulled the straps of his yoke. 32 

Another of the shadowy kings of Dilmun is mentioned in the annals of 
Assurbanipal. The Assyrian king's general, Bel-ibai, launched a campaign 
against southern Mesopotamia to consolidate the northerner's rule over it. 
He conquered Bit-iakin, possibly the region of Kuwait in the north-eastern 
corner of the Gulf, and Elam in the south-western part of Persia. In his 
correspondence from the field, Bel-ibai mentions 'Hundaru, King of Dilmun'. 33 
The king of Assyria seems to have thought it expedient to deal with the 
Dilmunite ruler by diplomacy rather than by attempting force of arms and in 
a letter he offers to confirm Hundaru's rule in exchange for an acceptance of 
Assurbanipal's suzerainty and for support in his war against Babylon. This 
the lesser king evidently thought was a prudent course and a Dilmunite 
ambassador, I'idm, is reported as being accredited to the Assyrian court. At 
this same period, the arrival of what is tribute, booty, or an exchange of gifts 
between two rulers — the point is not clear and probably depends on whether 
it is Assurbanipal's or Hundaru's point of view that is considered — is recorded 
as arriving at the Assyrian capital from Dilmun. Whatever it was, it was a rich 

120 



THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 

consignment of merchandise; it included twenty-six talents of bronze, goods 
manufactured from that metal and from copper, and sticks of precious woods, 
testifying convincingly to the wealth that Dilmun evidently still enjoyed. The 
excavations at the Qala'at al-Bahrain of this neo-Babylonian period (c. 700 
BC) reveal an extensive town with handsome public buildings. 34 



ALEXANDER THE GREAT AND THE GULF 

The ancient world reached its climax and its end in the colossal figure of 
Alexander the Macedonian. Perhaps the only man so far born of woman (in 
his case the appalling Olympias) who was entitled to suspect that he was a 
god, Alexander bridges the ancient and modern worlds, the West and the 
East. In many parts of western Asia he is still a living presence; there is much 
in the intellectual heritage of the West that can be traced back to Alexander's 
unleashing of the flood of knowledge, ideas and technology which the Near 
Eastern states possessed and which, pouring over the intellectually barren 
lands of Europe, made them flourish. 

In the last year of his life, shattered by the death of Hephaestion, his 
companion from boyhood, Alexander's never wholly stable personality 
toppled over into what was, in all probability, acute mania. With the memory 
of the appalling march through Gedrosia (Makran) on the southeastern side 
of the Gulf still vivid in his mind and in the minds of his unfortunate 
commanders and men, he turned his eyes towards Arabia. 

He was, it is alleged, angered at the refusal of the Arabians to allow him 
the homage which, as the world conqueror whose dominions were vaster 
than those of any emperor who preceded him, he felt entitled to demand. 
Already the stark and matter-of-fact sense of total independence of spirit, so 
characteristic of the desert-dwellers, made the prospect of acknowledging 
even Alexander's sovereignty unthinkable to the people of the peninsula. 
Alexander had hopes, similarly unfulfilled, that he might be recognized as 
divine by the Arabians who, he was given to understand, only worshipped 
two gods, who were identified by the Greeks with Uranus and Dionysos. It 
was not, Alexander considered, unreasonable that he should be regarded as 
worthy of divine honour since his achievements surpassed even those of 
Dionysos; Uranus was, of course, far too old a divinity to be considered as 
an Alexander. 

All of this we learn from Arrian, a Bithynian civil servant in the service of 
the Roman Empire, who flourished in the second century AD and who wrote 
the most monumental surviving history of Alexander's lifetime. Though he 
lived several hundred years after his subject's own career, it is evident that 
he was able to draw on sources contemporary with Alexander himself. 
Amongst these were the logs of several of Alexander's sea captains, including 
his most celebrated admiral, Nearchos the Cretan. Arrian lived in the days of 

121 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Hadrian, perhaps the most agreeable and certainly the most civilized of Roman 
emperors, himself a worthy successor to Alexander, whom he held in deep 
admiration. 

Arrian gives a detailed description of their voyages, particularly Nearchos'; 
it is appropriate now to turn to his words: 

Alexander had ideas of settling the seaboard of the Persian Gulf and 
the off-shore islands; for he fancied it might become as prosperous a 
country as Phoenicia. The naval preparations were directed against the 
Arabs of the coast, ostensibly because they were the only people in 
that part of the country who had sent no delegation to wait upon him, 
or shown their respect by any other normal act of courtesy; actually, 
however, the reason for the preparations was, in my opinion, Alexander's 
insatiable thirst for extending his possessions. 

Report has it that Alexander had heard that the Arabs worshipped 
only two gods, Uranus and Dionysus, the former because he is seen to 
contain within himself not only the stars but the sun too, the greatest 
and clearest source of blessing to mankind in all their affairs, and the 
latter, Dionysus, because of the fame of his journey to India. Alexander 
accordingly felt it would not be beyond his merits to be regarded by 
the Arabs as a third god, in view of the fact that his achievements 
surpassed those of Dionysus; or at least he would deserve this honour 
if he conquered the Arabs and allowed them, as he had allowed the 
Indians, to retain their ancient institutions. Moreover, the wealth of 
their country was an additional incitement — the cassia in the oases, the 
trees which bore frankincense and myrrh, the shrubs which yielded 
cinnamon, the meadows where nard grew wild: of all this report had 
told him. Arabia was a large country, its coast (it was said) no less in 
extent than the coast of India; many islands lay off it, and there were 
harbours everywhere fit for his fleet to ride in and to provide sites for 
new settlements likely to grow to great wealth and prosperity. 

He was further informed of the existence of two islands off the 
mouth of the Euphrates. One of them lay fairly close, at a distance of, 
perhaps, fifteen miles from that point on the shore where the river 
joins the sea. This, the smaller of the two, was densely wooded, and 
contained a temple of Artemis the regular service of which was 
performed by the islanders themselves. Deer and wild goats found 
pasture there, and as they were held sacred to the goddess it was 
unlawful to hunt them except for the purpose of sacrifice. For this 
reason only was the ban upon taking them removed. Aristobulus tells 
us that Alexander decreed that this island should be called Icarus 
after the Aegean island of that name. 

The second of the two islands, called Tylus, lay off the mouth of 
the Euphrates at about the distance a running ship can cover in a day 

122 



THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 

and a night. It was of some size, most of it neither wild nor wooded, 
but fit to produce all sorts of cultivated crops in their proper seasons. 
Some of this information Alexander got from Archias, who was sent 
out in a galley to reconnoitre the coast for the proposed expedition 
against the Arabs. Archias reached Tylus, but did not venture beyond; 
Androsthenes, who went in command of another galley, got further, 
sailing round a part of the Arabian peninsula, and Hiero, the shipmaster 
from Soli, made greater progress than either. Alexander put him in 
charge of a third galley and gave him instructions to circumnavigate 
the whole peninsula as far as the Egyptian town of Heroopolis on the 
Red Sea. But even he found his courage fail him, though he had 
sailed round the greater part of the Arabian coast; he turned back, 
and stated in his report to Alexander that the peninsula was of immense 
size, nearly as big as India, and that a great headland ran far out into 
the ocean. This headland had, indeed, been sighted at no great distance 
by Nearchus' men on their voyage from India, before they altered 
course for the Persian Gulf. 35 

This passage is of considerable interest for the light which it throws on the 
Gulf in antiquity. It may be worth pausing for a moment to consider it in 
greater detail. 

Arrian draws on Aristobulus for some parts of his account and Aristobulus 
was a contemporary of Alexander. However, most of his analysis of Nearchos' 
voyage depends upon the admiral's own authority; it appears in the form of 
The Indica which Arrian based on Nearchos' journals. 

The first point to observe is that Alexander had ideas of settling the seaboard 
of the Gulf and the offshore islands; he fancied it might become as prosperous 
a country as Phoenicia. If nothing else, Alexander demonstrates here a 
remarkable foresight, for after his death colonies of Greeks established 
themselves along the Arabian shore and inland in Arabia. 36 The colonies 
flourished greatly for they lay athwart the spice routes from the south which, 
even in Alexander's time, were already bringing great riches to the peninsula, 
a point which Arrian himself records. 

It is in his geographical observations, however, that the greatest interest in 
Arrian's narrative lies. He describes 'two islands off the mouth of the Euphrates'; 
one of them, densely wooded and rich in game, was sacred to a goddess 
whom the Greeks identified with their own Artemis. Alexander decreed that 
the island should be called Ikaros, a curious choice despite the explanation 
which the text provides. Ikaros in the Gulf puzzled commentators greatly 
until the discovery of a substantial temple, also of the Hellenistic period, 
unmistakably Greek in architecture and attributes, made it clear that Failaka 
is Ikaros (see also Chapter 8). 37 

The second island is called Tylos; this is Bahrain, and it features in most of 
the records left by ancient historians and geographers. Indeed it has a quite 

123 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

unique recorded history for the first literary reference to it was more remote 
from Arrian's day than his time is from our own. 

The seriousness of Alexander's intentions towards the exploration, if not 
the conquest of Arabia, is manifested by the fact that other senior officers of 
his staff, beside Nearchos, carried out voyages of exploration in the Gulf. 
These were Archias, Androsthenes and Hiero, the last having evidently sailed 
beyond the Gulf and begun the formidable task of sailing round the Arabian 
coast, through the Red Sea to Egypt. He did not complete it. 

According to Nearchos, Alexander sought intelligence about the people 
along the coast of the peninsula, their habitations and in particular the 
distribution of safe anchorages, sources of fresh water and of game or 
other victuals. It has been speculated that one of the most extraordinary 
acts of Alexander's life was connected with his interest in Arabia and the 
unexplored regions to the south and west of his dominions. 38 In his later 
years, seized compellingly with the idea of his divinity, Alexander saw 
himself fulfilling a destiny which had never before fallen to the lot of any 
man, divine or merely mortal. He became subject to one of the strangest 
and most persistent preoccupations of his lifetime. This seems, in essence, 
to have consisted of a deliberate attempt to sweep away, or at least to 
symbolize the sweeping away, of the barriers which had divided the east 
and west of his dominions, the Greeks and those others who inhabited 
European lands from their brothers in the Persian lands which had been 
brought under his hegemony. The remarkable and spectacular marriage 
of 10,000 at Susa, when Greeks and Persians were mingled in what seems 
to have been a consciously sacramental, if somewhat Hollywood-styled, 
occasion, was the most remarkable manifestation of this idea. As he moved 
towards his death Alexander became more and more exalted; a sort of 
transcendental quality seized him, manifested in his conviction (one which 
indeed it is difficult perhaps entirely to disregard) that his destiny was 
different in kind from those of other men. The control of the Gulf and of 
its western littoral (he already held the eastern shore by his subjugation 
of the Persian Empire) would have enabled him to bring all of his wide 
dominions into coherent and mutual contact, to unite the two great 
divisions of the world under his divine sovereignty. Then, no doubt, he 
would have turned towards the west and to a destiny which is, alas, 
beyond speculation. 

His death in Babylon, which he entered in defiance of the Chaldaean 
soothsayers (who were amongst the most skilled in what must have been a 
generally difficult and often risky profession) ended any prospects of the 
universal brotherhood of man being introduced in this early dawn. If the 
King had lived out a more generous lifespan, the bleak 2,000 years which 
ultimately succeeded his time might have been suffused by a kinder light, 
had the precepts of the Academy prevailed, rather than those of the synagogue 
and the several Romes. 

124 



THE POLITY OF THE ANCIENT GULF 

Unawed by Alexander's claims of divinity, the people of Arabia and the 
Gulf, accustomed perhaps to less equivocal godheads, ignored his tremendous 
presence and were thus never brought into his short-lived empire. But for a 
region which for 3,000 years before Alexander's day had the reputation of 
being the meeting-place of an entire and formidable pantheon, a slight, 
obsessive Macedonian, divine or not, did not perhaps mean very much. The 
gods of Sumer assembled in Dilmun were certainly more elemental than 
Alexander and, as gods, more practised in inspiring awe amongst their 
followers. However, even they did not achieve his extraordinary reputation. 

Whatever may have been Alexander's role as a divinity, we are on firmer 
ground with the inscription which he caused to be set up on Failaka island in 
the Bay of Kuwait, preserving it as a sanctuary. The stone is now to be seen 
in the Failaka Museum. 39 

One of the many remarkable discoveries which have resulted from the 
past years of excavation in the Gulf and eastern Arabia has been the hitherto 
entirely unexpected penetration of the region by Greek influences. Alexander's 
interest in Arabia was, of course, well known and his determination to conquer 
it among his last recorded acts of policy. What had not been expected was 
the extent to which settlements quite unmistakably Greek had been established 
in Arabia in the years following his death. 

The involvement of the Greeks in the region marks one of the high points 
of its history. All over the area, in Bahrain and in eastern Arabia as well as on 
Failaka, even far down into the Arabian desert, Greek influence indicates a 
degree of prosperity and importance for the region which it had hardly enjoyed 
since Old Babylonian times. The evidence of the grave fields in Bahrain is 
notable in this regard: no accurate count has been made, but, whilst a 
substantial percentage of the tens of thousands date from the late third and 
early second millennia, a large number can be traced to Hellenistic times. It 
is, indeed, curious how the inhabitants of Bahrain and the nearby mainland 
in the third and second centuries BC reverted to the practice of mound burial 
employed by their predecessors. Not all the bearers of Greek traditions, 
however, favoured (or perhaps could afford) interment in a family or individual 
grave mound. A Greek burial ground, in which the graves are simple shafts, 
though set beneath one large mound, was found by chance in Bahrain's 
capital during a construction project. 40 No doubt the inhabitants of the graves 
were modest people, seamen perhaps, who lived in or were connected with 
the fourth city level at the Qala'at al-Bahrain, which is associated with the 
times immediately succeeding Alexander's lifetime. Two skeletons were found 
intermingled in the same grave. From Sar, a most important site in the earlier 
periods of Bahrain's prosperity, the graves of the Hellenistic period have 
yielded, amongst other objects, an appealing little pottery horse and rider, 
perhaps a votive object, perhaps a toy. 

In Failaka, Greek influences were of great significance. Whether this was 
because of Alexander's interest in the island or whether the Greek involvement 

125 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

was of longer standing is unknown, but a substantial Greek settlement has 
been identified. One of its buildings was evidently a factory for the 
manufacture of pottery figures; 41 since most of these seem to be cultic, it may 
be presumed that they served the sacred nature of the island, perhaps 
indicating the presence of pilgrims who would make use of the products of 
the factory. 

The Greek presence is also to be detected deep into the Arabian desert. At 
Fau, about 600 kilometres (370 miles) south of Riyadh, a market-town with 
considerable evidence of Greek influences has been excavated by the King 
Saud University, Riyadh. 42 A whole chain of settlements was strung out across 
the desert, linking the spice-producing regions in the south with the Gulf 
coast in the east. From the cities on the eastern seaboard, including Bahrain, 
Arabian spices were exported to the Greeks of Persia and as far away as 
those who settled, in the wake of Alexander, in India. 

But the most significant remains of the Hellenitic period on Failaka, other 
than the Alexander proclamation, are those of a small Greek temple, excavated 
on the island. 43 It is a handsome construction, though modest in scale; it is, in 
fact, a very pretty miniature Greek fane. The quality of its architecture, 
however, shows nothing provincial about it; indeed, it would seem likely 
that its construction was supervised by a Greek-trained architect, perhaps 
using craftsmen imported for the project. The temple was built after Alexander's 
death and perhaps its quality is a consequence of the importance which his 
decree gave to this distant outpost of the Greek world. 

According to another inscription, dedicated by one Soteles, a citizen of 
Athens, Artemis in Failaka bore the surname Suteria and is hailed as 
'Sarconices'. 44 The Greek presence on Failaka was not only religious, however. 
Presumably to defend the little temple, the factory and the township from 
marauders, a fort was built. The inscription left by Soteles joins 'the soldiers' 
with him in its dedication; it is difficult not to feel some sympathy for Greek 
soldiers so far from their homeland in so very remote and distant a place as 
Failaka must have seemed, far from the customary entertainments and civilities 
of Greek life. 



126 



THE MYTHS OF SUMER 
AND DILMUN 



Like most of mankind before or after them, the Sumerians were puzzled by 
the world and felt keenly the need to explain it to themselves. Through the 
medium of their language they created splendid images and stories to link 
the worlds of gods and men, with the facility with which the Egyptians carved 
in stone to the same purpose. They wondered at the world and took, on 
balance, a rather humble view of their place in it. Their gods, an unappealing 
and generally disagreeable race, were, with few exceptions, largely ill-disposed 
or at best indifferent to man. 

The Sumerians saw all life as vain and man as the powerless creature of a 
capricious and often malevolent destiny; they are a people with whom it is 
easy to find much in common. It may be that their dispiriting view of the 
world was in part the result of their geographical location; in part it may have 
been the inheritance of the generally pessimistic religious ideas of the Semitic- 
speaking component in their society. Their land lay between two powerful 
and unpredictable rivers, which, despite all the controls they might exercise, 
in one year could bring abundance and in the next ruin. In considering this 
sense of impending catastrophe — the apparently basic Sumerian belief that 
something dreadful was always about to happen — it must be remembered 
that the Biblical story of the Flood is the record of a Sumerian cataclysm, 
dimly recalled by the descendants of the nomadic tribes which wandered 
the deserts beyond the cities' limits. The social and political structure of their 
society was weighted against permanence and tranquillity and, as in Greece 
2,000 years later, constantly led to war and the destruction of one little state 
by another. 

Nor did they find any consolation in creating comforting fantasies about 
an afterlife, which on the one hand might redress the pain and suffering of 
the earthly existence, or, on the other, would be an idealized extension of 
life on earth. To the frankly rather complacent Egyptians, for example, no 
more perfect life could be imagined than a perpetual sunlit existence in the 
Nile Valley. But the Sumerians, anticipating alike Freud and the doctrine of 
original sin, said Never has a sinless child been born to its mother" and in 
some of their moods (though fortunately not their most characteristic) they 

127 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

bore a frightening load of quiet despondency around with them, which 
manifested itself most strongly when they considered their likely fate after 
death. Forlornly, they described a state in which the souls of the dead crouched 
twittering, hungry and thirsty, beaten by the scaly wings of dreadful birds in 
the dusty, windswept corridors of an underworld 2 which has many features, 
if so they may be termed, of the Christian or Muslim Hell and the Greek 
Hades; indeed the whole dispiriting idea of the place of eternal punishment 
and suffering may well descend from this dismal Mesopotamian concept. 



THE GODS OF SUMER 

The gods of Sumer were responsible for many, if not all, of the problems 
which beset mankind. The Sumerians invented a splendid and colourful 
theogony but it was one in which the gods are rarely seen to advantage for, 
in the Sumerian view, there was little good that might be said for them. 

The dispassionate view which many of the ancients took of divinity is in 
sharp contrast to the more respectful attitudes of later ages. Everyone is 
familiar with the discreditable antics of the Greek pantheon, whose members, 
obsessed by alternating waves of greed, lust and ill-temper, mirrored only 
too exactly the character of humanity itself. The Hebrews, influenced by the 
harshness of desert life and apparently responding to the darker aspects of 
Sumerian beliefs (though their ancestors may have been responsible for the 
blacker sides of Sumerian convictions), created the jealous and temperamental 
Yahweh, who only emerged as the sole god, hidden on his Jerusalem 
mountain-top, after his adherents had disposed of those other deities whom 
once the Hebrews worshipped and of whom they long sustained nostalgic 
memories. Only the Egyptians, typically insulated alike by their desert 
boundaries and the high opinion they held of themselves, blessed the gods 
unreservedly, feeling compassion towards those less happy races of mankind 
which had the misfortune not to be born Egyptian. If there was one thing of 
which, for example, a Memphite landowner living in the early centuries of 
the third millennium could be certain, looking out contentedly over his estate 
as evening came on, it was that God was an Egyptian; there was no comparable 
comfort to sustain the Sumerians. 

In the Sumerian canon of belief the greater and the lesser gods, the latter 
often the servants of the former, were brought into existence first; and the 
world (by which was really meant the land of Sumer and the Gulf, the sea 
whose waters washed its southernmost shore) was made ready for them. 
Every major divinity received a plot of land which was to be his or hers, and 
the elements and all visible and hidden things were each apportioned to the 
charge of one of them. All the great gods, collectively known as the Annunaki, 
were given households of lesser gods who, in addition to serving their divine 
masters, also served the useful purpose of interceding between mankind 

128 



THE MYTHS OF SUMER AND DILMUN 

and the gods, when men had been created. They were, it has been suggested, 
the spiritual ancestors of the Christian 'guardian angels', and every Sumerian 
family head had his personal divinity to whom he would address his prayers, 
begging him to take a petition to the High Gods, for they were too awful for 
man directly to approach. 

When, in the beginning, the world was made and parcelled out to the 
various gods and goddesses, all was admirably conceived, but the divinities 
felt that their world lacked something: it needed docile and obedient creatures 
who might cultivate the earth and harvest it, and maintain order amongst the 
other animals. Indeed, the first recorded strike took place when the lesser 
Sumerian divinities, the Igigi-gods, downed tools and, glowering at the 
Annunaki, the High Gods, intimidated them into accepting their just demands 
for leisure and their belief that largely agricultural pursuits were unsuitable 
occupations even for minor deities. 3 The ruling divinities were thus forced to 
take action and to improve the conditions of their junior colleagues. Clearly 
the work had to be done by someone, and so man was created for the 
purpose of carrying out such menial and ungodly tasks. Having made man, 
the gods also decided it would be both pleasant and useful for a system of 
worship to be introduced, thus showing that from the earliest times they 
suffered from that curious and recurring sense of insecurity to which divinities 
seem much to be subject, an insecurity which needed to be assuaged by 
their constantly being told, by legions of believers, how sublime they were. 
For these humble purposes, therefore, was mankind created, to be the 
creatures of each god and the workers on his estate. This was the time of 
primaeval innocence, when, dutifully, 

The whole universe, the people in unison, 
to Enlil with one tongue, gave praise. 4 

The Sumerians' concept of the trappings and attributes of divinity still, in 
some respects at least, haunt contemporary man. When the gods manifest 
themselves they are fully realized in what might be described as the classic 
divine mould. They are superhuman, invisible, unbound by time and space, 
rulers of the elements and hungry for worship. They are represented in human 
form but are gigantic, with distinctive clothing and, in the case of the male 
gods, with rather alarming hats, apparently a sort of horned turban with 
which they are invariably portrayed on, for example, the seals which are one 
of the glories of Sumerian (and later, Akkadian) culture. The horns would 
appear to be those of bulls, probably Bos primigenius. 5 

Male divinities predominated in Sumer; the Mother, known by many names 
but in her most potent form called Ninhursag, is a great one, but never 
supreme. Unlike Egypt, where in the case of ancient gods like Ptah, Horus 
and even Osiris, it is possible to speculate about dimly observed human 
originals, mighty heroes who left the memory of their rule so vivid in the 

129 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

people's consciousness that they raised them to the most honoured rank 
they could conceive, Sumer's gods are far more elemental and harshly 
absolute. They never achieved the numinous quality of that most mysterious 
of Egyptian gods 'Him whose name is hidden', the nobility of the later 
'unknown' Amon, or even the philosophically rather tepid beneficence of 
Akhna ton's Aten. 

The Sumerian cosmology held that in the beginning was the primaeval 
sea, represented as female; her oceanic form possibly again commemorates 
the Sumerians' own preoccupation with the sea, in this case the waters of the 
Gulf. From the chaos of the waters, the cosmic mountain was begotten, in 
which form heaven and earth were united in the persons of two great divinities, 
An, the god of Heaven, and Ki, the goddess of Earth. From their union sprang 
Enlil, the Lord of Air, who then became the executive leader of the Annunaki, 
the assembly of the High Gods, and the recipient of the chorus of praise 
offered by all the people. 

An and Enlil were associated with two other major divinities: Enki, 
Lord of the Abyss, the water god, one of the most popular in the pantheon, 
and Ninhursag, the Lady of the Mountain, the Great Goddess. Other 
important members of the divine family included Utu, god of the Sun 
(whose Akkadian name Shamash survives in the Arabic word for sun, 
shams); Nanna, god of the Moon, later to be known as Sin; and Inanna 
the Ishtar-Aphrodite goddess of love and lust. Inanna was a highly 
equivocal goddess. She softened when she became the Semitic Ishtar 
under the Babylonians, but, as will be seen from the Gilgamesh epic later 
in this story, the Sumerians themselves were very much in two minds 
about her. Inanna has part of her legendary connections linked with 
Dilmun and hence to the subject of this study. She says of herself: 'I am 
Inanna of the place where the sun rises.' 6 She is also reported to have 
'washed her head in the fountain of Dilmun', 7 a reference perhaps to the 
many freshwater springs which may be found in the north of the island, 
and, more surprisingly, in the sea itself which divides Bahrain from the 
mainland of Arabia. The subterranean waters of eastern Arabia and the 
central Gulf were a particularly powerful element in giving the region its 
reputation for sanctity and the special favour of the gods. 



ENKI 

Enlil and Enki were the most important of all the gods to the Sumerians. Enlil 
was thought of as a sort of divine Chief Executive, stern but usually just. Enki 
was the most beloved of the gods of Sumer, for he is the friend of man who 
brought knowledge of the arts and sciences to the black-headed folk, riding 
up the Gulf accompanied by rejoicing fishes. Enki's epiphany is marvellously 
described: 

130 



THE MYTHS OF SUMER AND DILMUN 

When Enki arose the fishes rose and adored him, 
He stood, a marvel unto the Apsu, 
Brought joy to the Enqu, 
To the sea it seemed that Anu was upon him, 
To the Great River it seemed that terror hovered about him, 
While at the same time the South Wind stirred the depths of the 
Euphrates. 8 

Although Dilmun had its own tutelary divinity, Enshag or Inzak, who will 
be revealed further in the legend of Enki and Ninhursag, where he is spoken 
of as 'Lord of Dilmun', Enki was possibly the land's first and most important 
god. It has been suggested, indeed, that the veneration of Enki, Lord of the 
Abyss, and patron of the fishes, may have originated in Dilmun and from 
there have moved north to the Sumerian lands. 9 If this were so, and if Enki 
was the original tribal god of the Sumerians, it could well be the reason for 
the belief that he brought the arts of civilization to Sumer from Dilmun. It 
would also be another reason for the reverence and affection in which the 
black-headed people held Dilmun as the Terrestrial Paradise. 

Enki was beloved by the Sumerians for the sympathy he displayed towards 
humanity and the kindly interest he seemed to take in the well-being of the 
race of men. He was less remote and terrible than most of his colleagues, 
more inclined to behave predictably and with goodwill towards man. He is 
among the most frequently portrayed of all the great gods in the vibrant and 
revealing glyptic art of the time. He appears in countless seals in various 
manifestations, on the water, in his reed house (which bears a close 
resemblance to the houses built by the Marsh Arabs to this day), amiably 
wrestling with wild beasts, receiving petitions. He is also represented in one 
of the most important activities of Sumerian gods, the sacred marriage, the 
hieros gamos which was celebrated down to Ninevite times, with the king 
enacting the god's role, partnered by one of the sacred temple women playing 
the part of the goddess. In many of his appearances, two streams of crystal 
water cascade from Enki's shoulders, in which his creatures, the fishes, disport 
themselves joyfully. "Water is Enki's special element, in particular the sweet 
waters hidden beneath the earth whose management was essential to the 
Sumerians. In their rather confused view Enki rode the waters of the Gulf 
and, by thus agitating them, filled the Tigris and Euphrates with their overflow, 
so bringing prosperity and abundance to his people. 

Enki is a chthonic divinity, his dwelling-place the Abyss, far from the 
haunts of man. His name means Lord of Earth, and by it his original sovereignty 
over the world is suggested. At some time, however, Enki's supremacy was 
challenged by Enlil, the Lord of Air, who then became the head of the 
Annunaki, under the kingship of the distant An. An was, incidentally, 
conceived of as some sort of demiurge who, having created the world, largely 
withdrew from its affairs to the higher heavens. 

131 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

The reason why Enki lost his primacy is uncertain: it may be that once the 
Sumerians had settled down to an existence on land and no longer depended 
so exclusively on the sea (as evidently they did originally, in witness of 
which are the offerings of fishes which were piled on Enki's altars at Eridu 
and the nets which were hung about them) they became more conscious of 
the mysterious powers of wind, storm and rain which whipped to fury the 
rivers and lagoons on which they had established themselves. The more 
kindly god of the sweet waters and the fishes was replaced by an elemental 
and implacable divinity whose officers were the bringers of storm and deluge. 
But it is likely that Enki is the most ancient male divinity whose name we 
know. Certainly the little shrine at his city, Eridu, piled high with the offerings 
of his creatures, the fishes, is the earliest of all temples that can be identified 
as such for certain. Enki, incidentally, was the god who was responsible for 
marking out the ground plans of temples. 

ENKI AND THE WORLD ORDER 

An early text describes Enki as the father of Enlil, suggesting that, as was 
repeated again in Babylonian times with Marduk, and with the triple sequence 
of Uranus, Kronos and Zeus, the son could become greater than the father. 
Another legend survives which shows Enki, here described as the son of An, 
to have been the original creator-god, displaying a brisk and cheerful attention 
to all the needs of the earth. A long and complex myth, Enki and the World 
Order, 10 describes his joyful bringing of order and all its blessings to mankind, 
to animals and to the land and cities of Sumer. Responsibilities are allotted 
by Enki to all the smaller divinities who have power over specific functions, 
elements or sections of the economy. 

The myth gives the impression of bubbling enthusiasm on Enki's part and 
it emphasizes his joy in the work which he had wrought. 

Enki proclaims his divine titles: 

I am the first son of An. ... I am the Lord of the Land 

I am the father of all lands 

I am the 'Big Brother' of the gods 

I am the record keeper of heaven and earth 

I am the leader of the Annunaki. 

Enki turns to the organization of the earth and amongst the first lands to 
be blessed are Magan and Dilmun: 

The lands of Magan and Dilmun 
Looked up to me, Enki, 
Moved the Dilmun-boat to the ground 
Loaded the Magan-boat sky-high. 

132 



THE MYTHS OF SUMER AND DILMUN 

In Sumerian times Magan was in all probability located on the coast of 
Oman and also perhaps on the Makran coast across the Gulf. 

Sumer itself next received Enki's blessing and he proclaims its glories. Ur, 
the city whose fate has been decreed by Enlil, and Melukhkha, probably the 
coastal regions of modern Pakistan, together with the cities of the Indus 
Valley are celebrated by the god; then back to Dilmun: 

He cleansed, purified the land Dilmun, 
Placed Ninsikil in charge of it. 
. . .he eats fish. . .he eats its dates. 

Enki's blessing of Dilmun is especially generous and gives it a strong 
identification with the sea, emphasizing the land's dependence on the fruits 
of the sea as well as on the products of agriculture: 

May the sea bring you its abundance, 
The city — its dwellings are good dwellings, 
Dilmun — its dwellings are good dwellings, 
Its barley is very small barley, 
Its dates are very large dates. 

Even late in the second millennium BC, long after the Sumerians had 
disappeared for ever, Dilmun's dates were still greatly sought after by the 
rulers of Mesopotamia. They were also responsible for a notably high rate of 
caries in the teeth of the early inhabitants of Bahrain. 

Amongst those whose power is called up by Enki is Utu, the sun-god, 
whose home is in Dilmun. One of the Paradise Land's epithets may be recalled 
in the following passage in which he identifies Dilmun in the same terms as 
the goddess Inanna, quoted earlier: 

The hero, the bull who comes forth out of the forest, 

Who roars lion-like, 

The valiant Utu, the bull who stands secure, 

Who proudly displays his power, 

The father of the great city, the place where the sun rises, 

The great herald of holy An, 

The judge, the decision maker of the gods, 

Who wears a lapis lazuli beard, 

Who comes forth from the holy heaven, 

Utu, the Son born of Ningal, 

Enki placed in charge of the entire universe. 

In some of the legends which survive and recount the doings of the fishgod, 
Enki presents a slightly disreputable, even a faintly absurd figure. But the 

133 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Sumerians seemed to have loved him, whilst the other divinities they feared. 
In one of the most important and complete of the early legends, Enki comes 
into full conjunction with Dilmun, for the story begins in that land, before 
time was. Dilmun is already Enki's home. 



ENKI AND NINHURSAG 

The myth concerns the rather fraught and complicated relationship of Enki 
and Ninhursag, one of the manifestations of the great and terrible primaeval 
goddess who survived into Sumerian times, her supreme authority then being 
subjected to that of the male gods. 11 Dilmun is splendidly described, a land 
of joy and peace, whose creation has been an unreserved success. Ninsikil is 
a tutelary goddess of Dilmun: her name means 'the pure queen'. 

The land Dilmun is a pure place, the land Dilmun is a clean place; 

The land Dilmun is a clean place, the land Dilmun is a bright place; 

He who is all alone laid himself down in Dilmun, 

The place after Enki had laid himself by his wife, 

That place is clean, that place is bright, 

He who is all alone laid himself down in Dilmun, 

The place, after Enki had laid himself by Ninsikil, 

That place is clean, that place is bright, 

In Dilmun the raven uttered no cries, 

The kite uttered not the cry of the kite, 

The lion killed not, 

The wolf snatched not the lamb, 

Unknown was the kid-killing dog, 

Unknown was the grain-devouring boar, 

The bird on high. . .not its young, 

The dove... not the head, 

The sick-eyed says not 'I am sick-eyed', 

The sick-headed says not 'I am sick-headed', 

Its old woman says not 'I am an old woman', 

Its old man says not 'I am an old man', 

Its unwashed maid is not. . .in the city, 

He who crosses the river utters no. . . 

The overseer does not. . . 

The singer utters no wail, 

By the side of the city he utters no lament. 

Only one thing apparently mars life in this happy land, the lack of sweet 
water, but the cohabitation of Ninsikil and Enki soon overcomes this 
deficiency. Ninsikil, a practical if somewhat opportunistic goddess, prevails 

134 



THE MYTHS OF SUMER AND DILMUN 

upon the relaxed and good-tempered Enki, evidently in a state of post-coital 
euphoria, to provide the island with the water it needs. He at once calls 
upon Utu the sun-god, to make the sweet waters flow. Utu does so, and all 
that is possible for the enjoyment of men is realized in Dilmun. Even the 
economy is transformed. 

Her city drinks the water of abundance, 
Dilmun drinks the water of abundance, 

Her wells of bitter water, behold they are become wells of good water, 
Her fields and farms produce good grain, 

Her city, behold it is become the house of the banks and quays of the 
land. 

An alternative translation 12 of the last line would have Dilmun as the place of 
assembly of the gods, their meeting-place and, so far as the Sumerians were 
concerned, the place of their origin. A fragment of a cuneiform tablet found 
at Asshur, the capital of the later bloodstained Assyrian Kingdom, indicates 
that e-karra, 'the House of the Quay', was the name of a temple in Dilmun. 13 
It may be recalled in the last line of the extract above and it is entirely in 
keeping with the Sumerians' commercial preoccupations that the quays of 
mercantile Dilmun should be so commemorated, even in the context of a 
hymn of praise to the most lofty of the gods. 

Now, however, the story takes another turn, and a strange and slightly 
sinister element enters it. Clearly no place so well endowed as Dilmun should 
be without plants and the benefits of cultivation. Enki proceeds to deal with 
this by inducing a complex and cumbersome series of pregnancies on 
successive generations of plant-goddesses, brought into being forthat purpose. 

The process starts with the Great Mother herself, Ninhursag, whose nine 
months of pregnancy are equivalent to nine human days. Their daughter is 
Ninsar; Enki rapidly lies with her too and in nine days her daughter Ninhur 
is born. Enki, indefatigable and undeterred by the fact that he is now dealing 
with his granddaughter, fathers Uttu, the plant-goddess, on Ninhur. 

Ninhursag, who apparently has been absent during this succession of 
pregnancies, now returns to the goddess-littered island and takes an ill-fortuned 
hand in the affair. She offers Uttu some helpful advice on the predictable 
course of her relations with the still tumescent Enki. What she proposes is, 
unhappily, lost from the tablet which contains the legend but Uttu, like a 
dutiful great-granddaughter, takes Ninhursag's advice seriously and, as a result, 
promptly if unexpectedly, gives birth to eight plants, unaided by Enki. 

The god, despite his divine nature, is now apparently exhausted by the 
efforts which he has so urgently been making in the cause of agriculture, 
and is lying 'stretched out in the swamp-land'. With him is his attendant, 
Isimud, and from him he learns the names of each of the eight plants which 
Uttu has mothered. As Isimud pronounces its name, Enki eats the plant 

135 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

concerned. Are there portents here of other myths reaching us from this 
Sumerian Eden: the Hebrew legend of the forbidden fruit and the Greek 
story of the ingestation by Kronos of his children? 14 It is also remarkable that 
when Enki is lying alone in the marshes, he masturbates, like Atum 15 the 
Egyptian creator-god, who, in one of the Egyptians' explanations for the 
process of creation, since he is the unique being, is obliged to resort to this 
procedure to start off the sequence of divine births which ultimately leads to 
the making of the earlier generations of the gods. 

When Enki has eaten all the plants, Ninhursag returns again, this time in 
a wild and angry epiphany. In a swirling rage she curses Enki for having 
eaten the plants: 'Until thou art dead, I shall not look upon thee with the eye 
of life.' Full of anger she disappears and Enki is stricken with a mortal sickness 
which affects eight parts of his body, each plant that he had eaten taking its 
revenge on a different organ. It is also possible (if confusing) that Enki is 
impregnated by his own semen in this phase of the story, again recalling an 
Egyptian parallel, the story of the conflict of Horus and Seth, where something 
not dissimilar occurs. 16 

A peculiar characteristic of the gods of Sumer seems to have been a tendency 
to fall to pieces in times of stress. The Deluge myth will demonstrate how badly 
they could behave when things became really difficult for them. The High Gods 
become discouraged: seeing the powerful Enki himself brought down by 
Ninhursag, they fall into a deep despondency and sit hopelessly in the dust. The 
peace and happiness of Dilmun is clouded by their distress and lack of resource. 

A new element is introduced at this point into the legend. The Sumerians, 
seemingly, were fond of animals and were the first people to record stories in 
which animals play a human role, like those to which Aesop later gave his 
name, and of the same order as those in the engaging animal cartoons which 
survive from Egypt and for which, indeed, there are also many Sumerian 
parallels. In this case it is the fox, not a creature normally noted for his sagacity 
and resource in Sumerian fable, who takes the initiative in the matter of Enki's 
sickness. 

Finding the miserable gods hopelessly watching their divine comrade sinking 
into what looks suspiciously like mortality, the fox offers to bring back Ninhursag 
so that she may heal Enki. As Enlil, the Lord of Air and prince of the gods, can 
think of nothing better himself, he accepts the fox's offer swiftly. 

At this point the text is indecipherable and we do not know by what 
means the fox persuades Ninhursag to return. But return she does and she 
agrees to heal the hapless Enki by means of the facility (a routine matter 
apparently to Sumerian goddesses) of giving birth to a succession of deities, 
each of whom acts as an antidote to one of Enki's ailments. Abu, Nintul, 
Ninul, Ninsutu, Ninkasi, Nazi, Dazimira, Ninti and Enshag are successively 
sprung from the goddess' fecund womb and each, having healed the 
appropriate part of Enki, is either appointed the tutelary of certain lands or 
married to another. Ninhursag then places Enki by her vulva and speeds his 

136 



THE MYTHS OF SUMER AND DILMUN 

healing. Enki is restored to his full godly powers and the poem ends with a 
paean of praise to him. 

The two last-named gods in the sequence brought to birth by Ninhursag 
to heal Enki, Ninti and Enshag are of special interest in the present context. 
Kramer has suggested that Ninti may be the original of the legend of Eve, the 
'first mother' of the Genesis creation myth and thus, possibly, a remote link 
with the two Paradise myths. 17 

Enshag is not one of the great gods of Sumer but he has a vital role to play 
in the identification of Dilmun and Bahrain. The discovery of the island's 
principal cuneiform text with its mention of this god has its place in a later 
section of this study. 

A text was found on Cythera, in the distant Aegean far away from the 
islands of the Gulf, which also refers to Enshag. 18 It is written in an archaic 
cuneiform and appears to refer to the god Enshag and the goddess Lakhamun, 
the gods of Tilmun, to whom it said 'The king of Tilmun Naram-Sin, son of 
Ibiq-Adad, king of Tilmun, for his life has made an offering.' 

Naram-Sin is not the king of Sumer and Akkad who was the grandson of 
Sargon the Great but was evidently a ruler of Esnunna c. 1830 BC. Ibiq-Adad 
seems to be unknown. What an inscription of this comparative obscurity 
was doing on an Aegean island so far from its own supposed island of origin 
is totally mysterious. 



ENKI AND OANNES 

Enki was a fish-god; the charming readiness of the fishes to adore him has 
already been recorded. One of the more remarkable and certainly one of the 
most ancient legends associated with the Gulf and the origins of knowledge 
concerns Enki in a curious manifestation of a creature, part-fish, part-man 
called Oannes, a Hellenized form of his Semitic name, Ea. 

Enki is almost invariably shown in human form in Mesopotamian art. 
Fishes were sacred to him and so was the ibex, a creature which features 
frequently on the seals which are so notable a product of the societies 
flourishing in the Gulf in antiquity; sometimes, indeed, Enki is manifested in 
the ibex, and his boat, in which he is often portrayed, was called Ibex of the 
Absu. The story of Oannes is contained in the work of Berossus, 19 who was 
a contemporary of Alexander the Great; he was Priest of Bel in the great 
temple of Babylon. He seems not to have been a very remarkable man nor, 
to judge by the parts of his Babyloniaca which have survived in extracts 
quoted in other men's work, a particularly gifted one. He was given a 
somewhat more exalted posthumous biography by the hand of legend, 
however, including fathering the Erythraean Sibyl. 

Berossus was a Hellenized Babylonian. He was an admirer of things Greek 
and he sought to reconcile the history of his own people with that of the 

137 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

new masters of the world. He wrote for Antiochos I, one of Alexander's 
successors, and set out to make available, in the Greek language, books of 
stupendous and quite unbelievable antiquity preserved at Babylon which 
contained the origins of his people, the transmission of the arts of civilization 
to them by the bizarre amphibious creatures which manifested themselves 
in the Gulf, and a list of kings, from before the Flood to Alexander. The 
books, suggested Berossus, contained 'the histories of heaven [and earth] 
and sea and the first birth and the Kings and their deeds'. 

The weird and mysterious creatures of which he tells suddenly appear 
and attach themselves to the race of men, proceeding to teach them all 
knowledge. The leader of the team of didactic monsters is 'a beast named 
Oannes' which 

appeared from the Erythraean Sea in a place adjacent to Babylonia. Its 
entire body was that of a fish but a human head had grown beneath the 
head of the fish and human feet had grown from the fish's tail. It also had 
a human voice. A picture of it is still preserved today. . . . This beast spent 
the days with the men but ate no food. It gave to men the knowledge of 
letters and sciences and crafts of all types. It also taught them how to found 
cities, establish temples, introduce laws and measure land. It also revealed 
to them seeds and the gathering of fruits and in general it gave men 
everything which is connected with the civilized life. From the time of that 
beast nothing further has been discovered. But when the sun set this beast 
Oannes plunged back into the sea and spent the nights in the deep, for it 
was amphibious. Later other beasts also appeared. He [Berossus] says that 
he will discuss these in the book of the Kings. Oannes wrote about birth 
and government and gave the following account to men. 20 

Oannes, himself, then describes the 'time when everything was darkness 
and water'. Strange monsters appeared; all manner of creatures came forth, 
to be ruled by a woman called Omorka. Then Bel, the great god, arose, split 
the woman in two, destroyed the monster forms and created men and beasts 
able to endure the air. 

The second of Berossus' books was The Book of Kings. He records in it the 
names of the kings of Babylon from the beginning of things. The earliest 
kings ruled for many thousands of years. They were attended or advised by 
other creatures, like Oannes, who came up from the Gulf; Berossus gives the 
names of these creatures, which were known collectively as apkallu, a term 
which may mean something like 'sages'. They were all of them mixtures of 
men and fish. 

The 'kings' are the legendary sovereigns who reigned before the Flood. 
The last of them is Xisouthros, a figure from Greek myth whose name is a 
Hellenized form of Ziusudra, the Sumerian hero of the flood myth in the 
Epic of Gilgamesh. 

138 



THE MYTHS OF SUMER AND DILMUN 

Berossus describes the Flood. The warning of its impending approach is 
given to Xisouthros by Kronos, the Greek equivalent of Enki. He includes a 
curious little story which purports to describe the birth of Gilgamesh, his 
being saved from an early death by an eagle and his upbringing, like Sargon 
the Great, by a gardener. 

The events which Berossus charts are, he says, based on records reaching 
back more than 400,000 years. This can safely be discounted, but his 
description of the fish-men apkallu, coming up to Babylonia from the Gulf 
is, if nothing else, a charming legend which enshrines the belief of the 
Babylonians and their Sumerian predecessors that their civilization originated 
from the Lower Sea, the place where the sun rises. 

Oannes and his attendants are clearly Enki and his familiars. Even in 
relatively late times priests of Enki/Ea were depicted wearing fish costumes, 
with fish head-dresses above their own features, thus impersonating quite 
convincingly the form of the apkallu described by Berossus. 

As to the apkallu themselves, none of the representations (so far as we 
know) to which Berossus refers, survives. However, there is a group of strange 
little figures, of uncertain provenance, which appear to come from early 
levels in south-western Iranian city sites. 21 These are in the form of men, 
covered with fish scales (though otherwise human in form) and each with a 
deep scar running down his face. These little figurines are made in segments: 
they are remarkably powerful and quite unlike anything else from Sumer or 
from early Elam. Whether they actually represent apkallu only Enki knows. 

The earliest of all temples discovered in Mesopotamia is at Eridu and was 
consecrated to Enki. It dates from Ubaid times, a simple sanctuary built on 
the virgin sand; it is the ancestor of all Sumerian temples. It was overlaid by 
seventeen successive buildings, each one more elaborate than its predecessor, 
culminating in a great third-millennium ziggurat, a splendid structure raised 
to the glory of Enki, more than 2,000 years after the little Ubaid shrine had 
introduced his worship to the land. 

In the first sanctuary was an altar piled with offerings 15 cm (6 inches) 
deep in fish bones, the relics of sacrifices placed there more than 5,000 years 
ago. The fish were sea-perch, creatures of the brackish lagoon waters. Enki 
was also much honoured, understandably, by sailors who courted his favour 
and goodwill in launching themselves upon the uncertain mercy of his 
kingdom's waters. If it is possible that Enshag-Inzak may be a manifestation 
of Enki himself, the suggestion that his worship in Bahrain may have preceded 
his cult in Sumer is wholly tenable. According to Rawlinson, the Babylonians 
acknowledged having received all their knowledge from 'the mysterious 
islanders of the Persian Gulf 22 — which, as the Babylonians were the direct 
cultural successors of the innovating Sumerians, they patently did not. It is 
another matter, however, with the Sumerians themselves. 

The gods of Sumer are to be seen at their best perhaps in the context of 
their place of assembly, the land of crossing, which was Dilmun. After the 

139 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

disaster of the Flood, they were said to cluster around the sacrifices provided 
for them by the prototypical survivor, Ziusudra, 'like flies', 23 a somewhat 
distasteful metaphor but one which reveals the consistently down-to-earth 
view of their gods which the Sumerians maintained. But they also clustered 
around the sacred land of Dilmun, the original Holy Land, from the legends 
of which all the others in the western world actually descend. In these legends 
they are revealed as a tremendous presence, great if intangible forms which 
were to exercise a profound influence on the world; so profound as to endure 
over the five or six thousand years since the people who invented them first 
began to fill their world with the stories of their intervention in the affairs of 
men. The modern world, when it takes account of such matters, draws its 
inspiration of the divine from the great monotheistic faiths which have 
moulded society over the last 2,000 years. Hebrew, Christian and Muslim 
religious beliefs have all drawn their inspiration from a common, though of 
course not from an exclusive, source. That source had its beginnings in the 
people of southern Mesopotamia; to those people Dilmun was a magical 
land, a faery place, half realized, half a place of myth. This was the Garden 
of Eden, the place of origins; there was no Fall there, though. In Dilmun all 
was pure and enduring. It is not surprising perhaps that its very existence 
was forgotten for so long, but the fact remains that, without this island and 
the legends which it bore, the world would not be quite the place that it is, 
nor would people, for at least the past 3,000 formative years, have believed 
quite what they came to believe. 



140 



7 

BAHRAIN 

The Blessed Island 



When Captain Durand visited Bahrain in the winter of 1878/9 he opened 
several of the tumulus burial mounds which dominate the Aali district, near 
the village of the same name. He reported to his government enthusiastically 
on his findings. In one of the tombs he appears to have come up against a 
wall, inconveniently sited for his further exploration; with disarming 
succinctness he observes: 'We blew this out.' 1 

However, the practice of dynamiting tombs is not a fair measure of Captain 
Durand's contribution to the uncovering of the early history of the Bahrain 
islands, for one discovery which he made in the casual manner of those days 
was to be of crucial significance in establishing the part that Bahrain had 
played in the early history of south-west Asia and, indeed, in the developing 
awareness of the extent of man's history. He found a black basalt stone 
which had engraved on it a plaque of cuneiform script, one of the few 
examples of early epigraphy yet discovered in Bahrain, and incontestably 
the most important. 

The inscription was embedded in the wall of a mosque in the Bilad ed 
Kadim, the ancient capital of Bahrain. Of this the Suq al-Khamis mosque is 
the only substantial building surviving, now much restored. Durand's stone 
was about 65 cm (26 inches) in length and its discoverer described it as 
being like the prow of a boat or an animal's tongue: it has also been said to 
look like a foot. Towards the narrower end of the stone an upright palm 
branch was inscribed. Beside the branch a rectangular 'box' contained four 
lines of inscription in the style of cuneiform script which prevailed during 
the eighteenth century BC, at the time of the first Babylonian Empire, roughly 
contemporary with Hammurabi, the great law-giver. 'Old Babylonian' 
cuneiform had by then become the customary script for most Near Eastern 
countries' official and business correspondence and for the literary 
productions of the Babylonian and Assyrian heirs of the civilization of 
Sumer (Fig. 7.1). 



141 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 



I. SKETCH OF STONE DISCOVERED BY CAPT DURAND. 
(2 FT. 2 IN. LONG). 




2. PALM BRANCH OVER INSCRIPTION. 




I 




•tfrf ►s-itir 



jj *• mw% 



sM? ^ 



4. THE SAME IN ASSYRIAN. 



Figure 7.1 (a) The 'Durand inscription' written in the cuneiform script in general use 

in the eighteenth century BC. 



142 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 



THE DURAND INSCRIPTION 



In the report to the Foreign Secretary's Department of the Viceroy's 
Administration in Calcutta, Durand reproduced the inscribed stone from a 
'squeeze' which he had made on the spot. Rawlinson attempted a translation 
in the Calcutta version: it is not, however, satisfactory and he evidently was 
able to revise it. 

It can be accepted with reasonable certainty that the stone is from Bahrain 
itself, perhaps the last fragment to survive of a palace of one of the island's 
merchant princes. Who 'Rimum' was will perhaps never be known, but at 
least his act of piety in invoking his god has assured him some small 
immortality. The text reads: 

e-gal ri — mu — um eri din — za — ak LU a — ga — rum. 

The Palace of Rimum, the Servant of Inzak, of the tribe of Agarum. 

The mention of Rimum's tribe, the Agarum, provides an example of the 
quite extraordinary continuity which may be found amongst peoples whose 
way of life remained traditional and predominantly tribal. It has been proposed 
that Agarum' is perpetuated in 'Hagar', as the Hasa Province of eastern Arabia 
and Bahrain itself were collectively called in mediaeval times. A tribe of 
nomads called the Beni Hagar still occupies land in the Hasa province of 
what is now Saudi Arabia and may, therefore, be related to Rimum's tribe. 
The Beni Hagar are an interesting phenomenon, incidentally, with a knack 
of appearing at significant moments of history. They seem to have been one 
of the Christianized Arab tribes in late pre-Islamic times and, having moved 
up to the north, to have been present at the fall of Jerusalem when it was 
captured in the seventh century AD by the Caliph Omar. 



THE GOD ENSHAG-INZAK 

'Inzak' was the Akkadian form of the name of the Sumerian god Enshag who 
features in the last stage of the chain of births which took place in Dilmun 
and is described in the legend of Enki and Ninhursag (Chapter 6). He was 
one of the principal divinities of the ancient inhabitants of Bahrain and in 
the legend referred to is proclaimed 'Lord of Dilmun'; he is said to control 
reason and wisdom, an area of concern which clearly he inherited from his 
father Enki. Temples were dedicated to him in Sumerian and Elamite 2 cities 
and he was worshipped in Babylonian times, under the name Nabu; later he 
became an influential member of the pantheon. He is, according to Rawlinson, 
the god represented in the sky by the planet Mercury, the sun's closest 
attendant and a divinity of considerable power and mystery in the ancient 

143 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

world. 3 The planets, incidentally, were called by the Sumerians 'the big ones 
that walk about', distinguishing them from the stars, 'the little ones which are 
scattered about like grain': both are pretty concepts. 

Enshag-Inzak-Nabu-Mercury was the 'dark' god, a wise and supple deity. 
His name has been interpreted (again by Rawlinson) as meaning 'the nearest 
Lord', referring perhaps to his position as Mercury in the solar system. There 
is some evidence that one of Enshag-Inzak's symbols was the palmtree; it is 
displayed prominently on the Durand stone where it is given particular 
importance. It is also very frequently represented on the Gulf seals (see 
Chapter 9) and it may be that it was an ideogram signifying the god's name. 
After all, according to the legend quoted earlier, the cultivation of the palm- 
tree was said to have originated in the Gulf. Rawlinson further suggested 
that the ancient name of Bahrain might mean 'the Blessed Island', an intriguing 
and pleasing suggestion in the light of its significance to the Sumerians. 

Rawlinson referred to the fact that in his History Herodotos reported 
Phoenician legends of their origins in which they ascribed their beginnings 
to the islands in the Gulf. If there is any truth in this myth at all, the farfamed 
ability of the Phoenicians in the arts of commerce and of navigation might 
reasonably have been attributed to their island origins. For if the Gulf islands 
did see their beginnings, they made their eventual home in Syria/ Lebanon, 
one of the most important centres of trade of the ancient world. 

It would perhaps be unwise to base any firm conviction on an Herodotean 
report alone. But it cannot be said too often that peoples in ancient times did 
cover extraordinary distances and, seemingly quite cheerfully, undertook 
great migrations. The founding of the Greek colonies around the 
Mediterranean and far into Arabia demonstrated this procedure in 
comparatively late times: the Phoenicians themselves were renowned for 
the practice in earlier times still. It now appears not wholly improbable that 
the report recorded by Herodotos was based on some historical reality. 4 

The theory of 'wave-migration' has demonstrated that groups, a tribe (whatever 
that may be) or a congeries of more or less related families or clans, can cover 
vast distances over a few generations simply by advancing almost imperceptibly 
year by year across grazing lands or territory other than that which requires 
settled cultivation. If, as seems quite probable, there was a deterioration in climatic 
conditions in the Gulf area during the early second millennium, its people may 
have started to move westwards until, in a comparatively few decades, they 
found themselves moving up or down the Levantine coast. 



DILMUN THE HOLY LAND' 

It may be appropriate to turn aside for a moment and consider further the 
identification of Dilmun with Bahrain and the island with the idea of the 
Terrestrial Paradise. It should be said that the Sumerians did not, so far as we 

144 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

know, suggest that Dilmun was a place to which the spirits of the dead were 
translated. They had only the haziest and, as has already been demonstrated, 
generally pessimistic views of an afterlife. Paradise meant for them the place 
of origins, the site of the original and benevolent creation. The original concept 
of the Garden of Eden has something of the same idea. 

Dilmun is the archetypal Holy Land, the first land in the world to be 
accorded this sacred character. Dilmun was holy ground and the legends 
which grew up around it all emphasize its sacred nature. 

Burrows (the philologist and epigrapher who speculated so compellingly 
about the possible meanings of many of the toponyms associated with the 
study; see Chapter 2) thought that the name 'Dilmun' may be Semitic in 
origin, not Sumerian. He suggested that it was a 'native proto-Arab name', an 
interesting suggestion indeed, but one which perhaps would not attract a 
great deal of support today. The speculation about a pre-Sumerian language, 
proposed in particular by the American Sumerologist, Samuel Noah Kramer, 
is a consideration which has arisen since Burrows' day. Kramer believed that 
certain words — the names of the two great rivers of Sumer, many place names 
in Mesopotamia, and some of the most common terms in use in Sumerian 
times — were inherited from an earlier people who occupied the land before 
the Sumerians entered it. This language has been variously called 'proto- 
Euphratean' and 'Ubaidian'; however, though the words concerned do not 
appear to be either Semitic in origin or Sumerian, most authorities are satisfied 
that the Sumerians and the people who made Ubaid pottery are one and 
there is no evidence of an earlier people occupying southern Iraq before the 
Sumerians entered it. It is puzzling, nonetheless, this intrusion of what appear 
to be wholly alien names, particularly those which apply to places and which 
we know persist over very long periods of currency and time. Whether Dilmun 
may be one of these pre-Sumerian names is not certain, but certainly the 
name is of immense antiquity. 



THE EARLIEST RECORDS OF DILMUN 

The first recorded mention of Dilmun, c. 3000 BC, appears in tablets from Uruk, 5 
the city of which, some 300 or 400 years later, the great hero Gilgamesh was to 
be king and from which he set out on his immortal quest. A large number of 
tablets was recovered from the centre of the ancient city, from the ruins of the 
archaic temple district of Eanna. The excavations began in 1928 but it is only in 
recent years that some of the tablets have been recognized as mentioning Dilmun. 
These are the earliest written texts yet known from anywhere in the world, and 
it is an attestation of the importance that Dilmun represented to the Sumerians 
that even at this early date it appears in the city's records. 

All of the references in the Uruk tablets to Dilmun seem to have a bearing, 
perhaps not surprisingly, on trade. One seems to refer to a tax- or, possibly, 

145 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




l,..-.SII.,-.,.r 



Map 2 Principal archaeological sites in Bahrain and adjacent islands. 



146 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

a rent-collector — a reminder, if one were needed, of the antiquity of such 
professions. This is contained in one of the literary forms much favoured by 
the Sumerians when they were still experimenting with writing, the making 
of lists. The tax-collector appears in a list of the professions. There are also 
lists of metal objects, in which a 'Dilmun axe' is noted. Dilmun occurs in a 
geographical list, which would be especially interesting if it were possible to 
read the text more completely; it would be valuable to know, for example, 
the sequence in which Dilmun was listed with other places, for the Sumerians 
later on tidily listed places in a coherent order, according to their distance 
from Sumer, for example. The state of preservation of the particular tablet on 
which this reference appears, however, is such that it does not permit precise 
decipherment. 

There is another mention of Dilmun which associates it with textiles, later 
to be one of the staple exports from Sumer in that Gulf-wide trade which 
Dilmun was to dominate throughout much of the third millennium and into 
the beginning of the second. Similarly, reference is made there to various 
foodstuffs, in the context of one of which there appears a somewhat mysterious 
figure, who seems to be 'the prince of the good Dilmun-temple'. 

The exceptional antiquity of these tablets from Uruk makes them of supreme 
importance in the history of writing and, hence, of communication. It is 
especially significant therefore that the Gulf, through the medium of its most 
important political construct, Dilmun, should already at this early date feature 
in so many different contexts, suggesting that already it was a diverse, 
multilevelled society. These early texts provide an opportunity for observing 
the method of writing the sign for 'Dilmun' from the earliest, at the end of the 
fourth millennium BC, to the beginning of the second millennium, over a 
thousand years later, by which time the conventional cuneiform system was 
fully evolved (Fig. 7.1b, see note p. 202). 

By the time that Dilmun first appears in the records, the 
Sumerians had already begun to set out on extensive 
voyages. They used the considerable waterways which 
existed naturally in southern Iraq. They also sailed the waters 
of the Gulf and established the unusual culture which was 
to flourish there. In doing so, they were the inheritors of a 
long tradition. At some time, in the very distant past, man 
took to the water. No doubt his early excursions on it were 
involuntary, but no amount of speculation will ever disclose 
Figure 7.1b to us how seamanship began. All we can reasonably assume 

is that the real breakthrough may have come when the 
making of reed-boats was adopted by the people living on the banks of the 
Tigris and Euphrates and the lakes and marshes which were connected with 
them, and by those who lived in similar though more favoured circumstances 
on the Nile. How this remarkable discovery was made is not known, but the 
building of reed-boats which depended on the 'wash-through' principle for 

147 




THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

their buoyancy and which would carry very considerable loads was one of 
the key discoveries of ancient technology. Reed-boats built to this principle 
also had the merit of being virtually unsinkable. 6 

Even when the Sumerians had perfected the construction of sea-going 
vessels of timber, the reed-boat was still the form they preferred, certainly 
when it came to depicting water or sea-borne voyagers. It was invariably 
associated with their gods, who were determined travellers. Unlike their 
Egyptian colleagues, however, who used boats principally for their journeys 
across the stars, the Sumerian gods were more inclined to use the river 
system for their visits to one another's cities and in the course of their 
godly activities. 

Islands, such as Bahrain, have always been invested with a mysterious 
and numinous quality. Early seamen must always have recognized gratefully 
their presence in the middle of an otherwise hostile element; often they 
have been consecrated to the great goddesses who, in remote antiquity, 
ruled the assemblies of gods which were later to be dominated by male 
divinities. To the Egyptians an island was the place of beginnings: the Divine 
Emerging Island that first rose out of the chaos of waters forming the Abyss 
in which the original creator-god lay inert. 7 

All islands, if they are to fulfil their mystical character, tend to be 
filled with a sense of presence, of something half-glimpsed out of the 
corner of the eye, of sounds heard in dream, uncertainly recollected on 
awakening, of groves stirring with unseen and elemental forces, of Apollo 
or Dionysos. Though Bahrain is essentially a desert island (some four- 
fifths of its land surface is stark and barren desert), it nonetheless 
possesses this mystical quality in generous measure. There are parts of 
the island, near the shore at Zallaq for instance, where the mangrove 
and palm grew lushly, densely indeed, like primaeval jungle. It is not 
difficult to believe that this is what the world was like, once upon a 
time. To the early voyagers a landfall near these groves must have seemed 
like evidence of the protection of a powerful god, whose presence might 
be manifested at any moment. 

The shoreline of Bahrain, in common with other parts of the Gulf, has 
advanced over the past 4,000 to 6,000 years as the level of the Gulf's waters 
fell. Many Neolithic sites originally on the seashore are now inland. Bahrain's 
main Ubaid site, at Al-Markh south of Zallaq, where sherds of Ubaid pottery 
have been found was, during the time it was used as an occasional camping 
area for small fishing expeditions, a little islet, separated from the main island 
of which, with the fall in the level of the Gulf, it is now a part. 8 

Bahrain is the only safe harbour between the head of the Gulf, where 
Sumer's seamen would have left the relative safety of their rivers and marshes, 
and Oman, the source of the copper which they so eagerly sought. In this 
voyage of some 1,000 kilometres (620 miles), Bahrain must have been 
singularly well-omened for them. 

148 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

Bahrain has probably changed little in physical character, other than in its 
buildings, road systems and all the appurtenances of modernity, since the 
time of its first settlers. Then, as now, only the northern part of the island was 
fertile. Roughly in the centre of the island is its most striking natural feature, 
the Jebal Dukhan, the Mountain of Smoke. It could only be described as a 
mountain in a land which is otherwise almost wholly flat: the Jebal Dukhan 
may be said to tower modestly, to a height of 130 metres. In the white heat 
of midday it does shimmer in haze and thus may have earned its 'smoky' 
epithet. 

On and around the mountain some of the earliest remains of Bahrain's 
history have been found. Here, and at sites on the coast, the hunters of the late 
Stone Age chipped their flints, making tools often beautiful as well as efficient. 

These once-coastal sites have yielded one of the most significant of 
Bahrain's archaeological finds: they are the only sites in the lower Gulf from 
which sickle-blades have been reported. 9 This suggests that Bahrain 
participated in early agricultural experiments and practices with which such 
sickles are associated, although it may be that they were used simply for the 
harvesting of wild cereals and do not imply their domestication. These sickles, 
though they must have been somewhat inefficient, for the teeth were set in 
highly friable materials including earthenware, were used for gathering corn. 
This is demonstrated by the glitter on the sickles' teeth caused by the silica in 
cornstalks. Sickles of this and similar types are known from Egypt, 
Mesopotamia and early Palestinian settlements. 



THE ARCHITECTURE OF DILMUN 

Amongst the many archaeological sites of importance on Bahrain there are 
two outstanding ones which demonstrate undoubted links with Sumer (as 
indeed they do with other cultures to the south and east); one is this large 
and complex tel known as the Qala'at al-Bahrain, whilst the other lies about 
6 kilometres (4 miles) further along the coast at Barbar. Many similarities in 
building technique, architectural detail and evident purpose proclaim their 
Sumerian connections, but with an important difference. Whereas in Sumer 
itself stone building was comparatively rare, due, reasonably enough, to the 
absence of local materials, the Bahrain remains are all stone-built and thus 
preserve more faithfully than many in Mesopotamia the format of buildings 
from early times. For this reason alone the Bahrain remains should warrant a 
reputation as some of the more important survivals from the ancient Near 
East. When the age of some of the Bahrain structures is considered, they 
deserve to be credited as amongst the most ancient of buildings indeed, for 
the earliest of them, particularly those at the temple site of Barbar, must have 
been erected not long after the first centuries of the invention of stone 
architecture itself. 

149 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Both sites demonstrate the importance which Bahrain must have held in 
the minds of the Sumerians and their successors. An interesting light is thrown 
by the stone-built Bahrain temples on the origins of that most familiar of 
Sumerian structures, the ziggurat, the stepped temple platform from which 
the legend of the Tower of Babel originates. The idea of the ziggurat seems 
to have originated in the need to keep sacred buildings clear of the flood- 
plain and in the very ancient Sumerian practice of regarding certain areas as 
irrevocably sacred. 

A building erected on a sacred site was thought of as being consecrated 
for all time. When the mud-brick structures needed major repair or when a 
larger place of worship was called for, the Sumerians simply filled in the 
courts and chapels of the original temple, raised a mound over it and erected 
another building on top of it. This procedure produced a stepped effect 
after the second of such rebuildings. Then the idea grew until the form 
itself became holy and, all over Sumer and the later Babylonian and Assyrian 
empires, stepped and terraced ziggurats were built, on the topmost level of 
which was built the god's most sacred shrine. The essential, if rather obvious, 
fact that produced this sequence may well have been the realization that 
mud-brick walls cannot be reused. The destruction of the original temple 
was thus rationalized by preserving it for ever under the mound raised 
above it. 

In Bahrain this did not happen, except perhaps vestigially at Barbar, because 
the buildings were of stone which, once it was cut and shaped, required a 
more intensely developed religious sense than the pragmatic Sumerians 
possessed, to resist reusing it. 



QALA'AT AL-BAHRAIN— THE CITY' OF DILMUN 

The mound which covers the city remains at Qala'at al-Bahrain is some 400 
by 800 metres east to west, rising to a height of 15 metres. This is a very 
substantial area and compares favourably in scale with the tels of Mesopotamia 
which cover some of Sumer's greatest cities. Only a tiny fraction of the site — 
some 5 per cent of the total — has been excavated and it is possible that if the 
whole area were cleared an entire archaic city would be revealed. Despite 
the modesty of the extent of the excavations so far undertaken, assumptions 
about the nature of the Qala'at al-Bahrain site have not been expressed with 
reservation; rather, the most generous conclusions have been drawn on really 
very little evidence. If the site were to be properly excavated, there is no 
telling what might be discovered. The first 'city' located at this site was little 
more than a small village settlement, used principally by seamen coming, in 
all probability, from further to the south. Having used the shore for occasional 
visits and for taking on supplies, they perhaps began to put down roots, to 
establish families there and, eventually, to produce a settlement. Such a 

150 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

sequence has happened in other Gulf sites, sometimes as the consequence 
of imperceptible changes in precipitation or climate. 

From its position near the shore and from the visible stoneworks which 
lie out in the shallow water, the second of the cities on the site is probably 
that from which the Dilmun merchants conducted their wide-ranging trade 
at the beginning of the second millennium, thus perpetuating a commercial 
tradition already centuries old. 

Five ancient (pre-Islamic) levels were established at the Qala'at al-Bahrain 
site by the Danish expeditions working there since 1953: 10 

1 City I, probably contemporary with immediately pre-Akkadian times (late 
Early Dynastic III in Sumerian terminology) c. 2400 BC. 

2 City II, perhaps founded in the period following the reign of Sargon the 
Great, King of Sumer and Akkad, c. 2370 BC, and flourishing particularly 
at the end of the third and the beginning of the second millennia, c. 2000 
to c. 1750 BC. 

3 City III, corresponding to the Kassite period in Mesopotamia, c. 1600 BC. 

4 City IV, corresponding to the Neo-Babylonian period, c. 650 BC. 

5 City V, the Greek period, c. 300 BC, continuing into the early centuries of 
the Christian era, before the Revelation of Islam. 

The second city is clearly the most important of those identified on the site. 
The list of settlements at the Qala'at also shows that there is little significant 
occupation to be detected in Bahrain before the closing centuries of the 
third millennium. One solitary Umm an-Nar sherd was found in the lower 
levels of the foundations, suggesting connections with a culture originating 
in Oman, whence Dilmun probably obtained the bulk of her copper. 11 

Traces of copper fragments have been found on the beach close to Qala'at 
al-Bahrain, lending material support to the record of Dilmun's trade, in which 
copper played so considerable a part. 12 Within the ruins have been found 
the remains of a metalsmith's forge, including a double bellows. It seems 
likely that Bahrain's exceptional fertility and the fact that the island was well 
wooded contributed to her value as a metal-working centre. Only with 
abundant timber could the fires have been kindled to smelt the raw copper 
into ingots. 

The distillation of liquor also played a part in the early Dilmun economy 
and rooms specially designed for the pressing of date juice demonstrate the 
antiquity of a process which may still be seen in use in parts of Arabia. 
Pottery was manufactured there and inside the ruins was uncovered the 
workshop of a maker of the distinctive Bahrain stamp seals, the discovery of 
which has added a new dimension to the Gulf's archaeology and to the 
minor arts of the ancient world. 

The walls of Qala'at al-Bahrain have survived the long ages since they 
were built remarkably well. In the area still uncovered today the buildings 

151 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

that remain date, in the most part, from the seventh century BC and, like 
many others in the island, are built with limestone cut from Bahrain's little 
neighbouring island, Jidda. Broad stairways and high gates also survive and 
still show the finely carved semi-circular hinge stones designed to bear the 
weight of massive doors. But Qala'at al-Bahrain has a history which reaches 
back nearly 2,000 years before this city flourished, at the very end of Dilmun's 
history. 

The first city at Qala'at al-Bahrain was built late in the second half of the 
third millennium and endured until it was destroyed, probably during the 
twenty-fourth century BC and maybe by the conquering armies of Sargon 
the Great who, it will be recalled, proudly claimed Dilmun as part of his 
empire. When he 'washed his spears in the waters of the Gulf he may have 
referred to his conquest and pillaging of the sacred island, whose ruler had 
presumably displayed some reluctance at being drawn into the Akkadian's 
empire. 

This period has yielded one of the characteristic pottery types, particular 
to the island. These vessels are large, with a highly distinctive chain ridge 
decoration; a number of early seals and a handsome steatite pyxis engraved 
with geometric designs and whorls, of which other examples have been 
found at Barbar, were also found in the first city levels. The steatite (or, more 
strictly, chlorite) vessel is typical of a product found extensively in other 
eastern Arabian contexts, dating from earlier in the third millennium (see 
Chapter 8). One of the steatite vessels is intact and of fine workmanship. It 
had three lugs, which suggest that it may have been suspended. This, with 
its slightly curving sides and outline, gives it the appearance of the alabaster 
vessels from the Cyclades, with which it may be approximately contemporary. 

Chlorite, as well as being the most popular and the most practical material 
for the fashioning of the Dilmun seals, was also favoured by Sumerian and 
Elamite craftsmen for making all kinds of vessels. 13 Its use continued for over 
2,000 years with the same general profile and decoration being turned out 
throughout that time. One steatite pot from Bahrain has a cross engraved on 
it as well as the typical dotted circle which frequently runs round the rims of 
the pots. 

From the Qala'at al-Bahrain City I, a fragmentary inscription was recovered, 
impressed on the inner rim of a large clay jar so that it could easily be read by 
tilting the pot; it gives a measure of capacity. The amount is expressed as: 

2 pani 4 sar 7 qa 

and has been equated to c. 118.8 pints. 14 

After its supposed Sargonid destruction, the city was rebuilt, but this time 
with a high stone rampart, presumably in the hope that its people would be 
secure against a second attack. At various places around the perimeter of the 
mound the city wall of the second foundation can be seen. Recently French 

152 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

excavations on the site have uncovered buildings from City II, some of them 
substantial in scale. 

This second city probably survived until well after the turn of the third 
millennium and was the southern location of the Alik Tilmun, the guild of 
energetic merchants from Ur who were responsible for so much of Bahrain's 
ancient prosperity. More seals were found on this level as well as Indus 
Valley weights, which reflect the close commercial relations which existed 
between Bahrain and the cities of Harappa and Moenjo-Daro. There is 
evidence that a sophisticated customs system existed in the city. City II is 
thought to be contemporary with the first temples at Barbar. 1 ' There is no 
doubt that the time during which it flourished was the highest point of Bahrain's 
ancient prosperity and influence. Excavations have revealed what appears 
to be the actual harbour, dredged from the shore, which allowed ships to 
run close into the city. 

Recent estimates of the number of burials represented by the Bahrain 
mound fields have also produced an estimation of the likely population of 
City II at the Qala'at al-Bahrain. The latest informed figure of 6,700 is based 
on the area occupied within the city walls; setting this figure against the 
population of the island as a whole, indicated by the number of burials, 
would suggest a total population of upwards of 60,000 inhabitants. 16 Such a 
population would be considerable for a small island in the third millennium. 

The extensive and perplexing necropoleis of Bahrain will be described 
later and the point made that little enough is known of the people who were 
laid in the mound-tombs; however, there can be little doubt that they were 
the people who lived and flourished at the various cities at Qala'at al-Bahrain 
and at other settlements on the island. Ivory ornaments were often placed in 
the tombs and ivory was worked at the Qala'at al-Bahrain, for a tusk prepared 
for further working by an ancient craftsman has been found there. 17 In all 
probability the ivory came from Melukhkha, the Indus Valley region where 
the elephant was indigenous and much venerated, though it is possible that 
it was taken from the dugong, the sea-cow indigenous to the waters around 
Bahrain. 

The next level at Qala'at al-Bahrain, the third city, appears to be 
contemporary with the period when the Kassites, a people from the mountains 
of Iran, ruled Mesopotamia. They were a rather barbarous people whose art 
was certainly not as distinguished as that of others among the ruling peoples 
of the land; however, they left their traces in Bahrain: tall, slender, roughly 
made pots and some of the very few cuneiform tablets yet to be found there, 
which are, as yet, unpublished. 

A Carbon- 14 date sets the destruction of City III at a median of 1190 BC ± 
60 years. This reading was obtained from date stones found in the ruins, a 
witness to the produce (the Sum Dilmun in Sumerian) whose excellence 
identified Dilmun in the minds of the ancients as strongly as its role as the 
Holy Land. The 'Kassite' city was clearly handsome, with a large, rectangular 

153 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

palace with parallel rooms on either side of it as one of its principal 
monuments. It is from the later years of the Kassite period that the 
correspondence survives between Ili-ippasra and Ililiya (Chapter 5), who 
was resident in Dilmun. It may be that Ililiya's letters were sent from this 
place, around 1370 BC. 

The fourth city was rich in finds, dating from the neo-Babylonian period. 
From this time, much later than the great days of Dilmun, came a hoard of 
silver dated, by means of a fine silver signet-ring bearing an Egyptian-style 
cartouche, 18 from the seventh century BC. This hoard was first thought to 
demonstrate links between Bahrain and the great civilization of the Nile 
Valley, which existed despite the two seas and the immense Arabian desert 
which separate them. However, later research suggests that the ring is 
Egyptianized Phoenician work (one of the few positive Phoenician links 
with Bahrain actually to be identified) and probably indicates a connection 
with that other great emporium of the ancient world, Byblos in the Lebanon. 
It was thought that the hoard had been buried deliberately, probably by a 
silversmith to whom it belonged, during the time of the invasions and wars 
in the Near East which the records of the period reveal. However, recent 
research has proposed that much of the silver may be an early evidence of 
'money', the tokens and silver pieces that were used before the introduction 
of coinage. 

It is this city which is open to the sky, and is approximately contemporary 
with Uperi, a king of Dilmun known from the Assyrian records. 19 One of the 
most readily identifiable remains is a large, almost square, white limestone 
pillar base, near the bottom of a flight of broad, shallow steps. Behind the 
pillar base a female skeleton was found in one of the terracotta, bitumen- 
coated 'bath-tub' coffins, reminiscent of, but in no sense connected with, the 
Mycenaean larnax. Scattered around this area other burials were discovered, 
including one which yielded some finely made bronze objects, including a 
bowl and a wine-dipper. Some of the burials were of children, their small 
bodies placed in simple pots. 20 Others, however, were such that a new light 
was cast on the beliefs and cult practices of the people of Dilmun c. 700 BC 
and on their continuity over a very long time. The cult also revealed much 
more ancient connections. 

Sunk in the floor of the buildings were several small pits, seven of which 
contained the coiled skeletons of serpents. Beads were also found in close 
proximity to the snake burials. The discovery was made in 1957 and it set up 
echoes of one of the incidents in the Gilgamesh Epic (see Chapter 10), when 
the serpent steals from the King of Uruk the flower of eternal youth which he 
had wrested from the seabed after many long and perilous adventures. 

In Zallaq, a small town in the centre of Bahrain's western coast, so-called 
'phallic' stone pillars were discovered in 1956; they have been removed 
from their original location. 21 Phallic objects, like beauty, tend often to be in 
the eye of the beholder. Whatever these are, one now stands at Barbar, 

154 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

whilst the others are in Denmark waiting to be returned to Bahrain. Though 
they date from a much earlier period than the snake burials (probably from 
the third millennium or the early second) and their allegedly phallic character 
depends upon an entirely subjective judgement, it is tempting to associate 
Gilgamesh-Serpent-Fertility-Phalloi-Snake Burials all in one neat equation 
and postulate the existence on the island of a snake cult of great antiquity. 
To many of the ancients, the serpent embodied the mysterious, hidden powers 
of the life-giving earth. An architectural fragment from Abu Dhabi, down the 
Gulf from Bahrain, whose archaeology is closely linked with it, demonstrates 
this strongly since snake and phallus have become one 22 (see Chapter 8). 
French archaeologists are now excavating the neo-Babylonian city at Qala'at 
al-Bahrain. It is already clear that much new information will be recovered 
from the site in consequence. 

The last level of Qala'at al-Bahrain in the pre-Islamic period, the fifth city, 
testifies to the extent of Bahrain's trade at the time with the Hellenistic world, 
for extensive finds of Attic pottery have been made there. This was the city 
which followed Alexander's blazing career but it has also yielded artefacts 
which suggest that once again the trade to India was open, demonstrated in 
particular by an attractive pottery figure of a girl of unmistakably Indian 

type- 
Throughout the early history of Bahrain there is evidence, as might well 
be expected, of connections with cultures on the mainland of Saudi Arabia. 
The fifth Qala'at al-Bahrain city has, for example, produced a number of 
miniature altars in pottery and a fragment of a steatopygous (with abnormally 
fat buttocks and thighs) pottery figure which make it clear that the island 
shared, to some degree at least, the goddess cult then prevailing in Saudi 
Arabia. This was perhaps centred around Thaj, where similar material has 
been recovered from surface sites in the vicinity of that extensive desert city. 
After this period, the Qala'at al-Bahrain site appears to have been 
abandoned until Islamic times. On the face of it, this long time gap seems 
improbable and merely points again to the importance of further excavation 
in the area. But, as with the written records of the island, it is Alexander and 
his times that close the Qala'at's record in antiquity. 

Just outside the gateway of the fifth city was found a pottery jar, buried in 
the ground, presumably to hide it either from its owner or from potential 
robbers. Inside the vessel were found some 300 silver coins dating from the 
reign of one of the Antiochid kings, of the same house as the one for whom 
Berossus wrote his Babyloniaca. 23 The coins are magnificent, most of them 
seemingly uncirculated tetradrachms. They bear a portrait of Alexander 
himself, wearing the horned head-dress in which he is identified as Herakles, 
that over-muscular hero whose legend seems to have absorbed incidents 
from the much earlier, if also substantially legendary career of the noble 
Sumerian king Gilgamesh. Alexander assumed the horns after he had been 
recognized by the priests of Siwa as the son of the ram-headed god Amon 

155 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

and hence true Pharaoh of Egypt. The Alexander hoard makes a splendid 
terminus to the record of the cities which had been established on the island's 
northern shore and which had flourished there at least 2,000 years before 
the Macedonian's lifetime. 



THE TEMPLE COMPLEX AT BARBAR 

About 6 kilometres (4 miles) to the west of the Qala'at al-Bahrain lies the 
island's other principal site, this time one with still more striking Sumerian 
connections, the great temple complex of Barbar. 24 Barbar lies on the northern 
shore of Bahrain facing up the Gulf to Sumer; its probable significance was 
first suggested by Durand on his pioneering survey of the island in 1878-9, 
a tribute indeed to his perception. 25 The Barbar mound is just under 2 hectares 
in extent and at once demonstrates the size of the complex of buildings it 
conceals. It is now encircled by palm plantations; the second and third temples 
are each superimposed upon its predecessor (Fig. 7.2). 

The earliest temple was built on a rectangular platform approximately 24 
metres (80 feet) long and 15 metres (50-55 feet) wide which may have been 
enlarged at a later stage (Fig. 7.3(a)). It was surrounded by a stone wall and 
there were a number of small stone-built rooms on its summit surrounding 
an open courtyard. The temple appears to have been built on a carefully laid 
layer of clean sand, above which, in turn, a layer of blue clay had been put 
down. A further layer of sand was then piled over the mound, presumably to 
ensure its ritual cleanliness before building actually began. Even in its first 
phase, the element of water which, as will be seen, was probably the most 
important factor in the rituals enacted at Barbar, already appears. In the 
south-western corner of this early complex two staircases led down to a 
square-built well. 

It has been suggested already that the Barbar temples have marked 
Sumerian connotations, though with notable differences which may well be 
the consequence of local Dilmunite influence. Two essentially Sumerian 
characteristics in relation to their sacred buildings may, however, be noted 
here: first, the buildings of the Barbar temples followed the practice of building 
over temples and shrines which had outlived their purpose or which required 
renewing, thus demonstrating the belief in the inalienably sacred character 
of a place once it had been consecrated to the service of the gods. This 
custom was observed when Temple II came to be built (Fig. 7.4). Temple I 
was largely dismantled but the central cult complex was allowed to stand 
and the new altars raised above it, showing this aspect of Sumerian influence 
at work over a period of 500 years (Fig. 7.3(b)). 

The other Sumerian practice which is represented at Barbar is to be seen 
in the burying of 'foundation deposits', quantities of pottery and metal objects 
ceremonially laid in the earth at the time of building, presumably as votive 

156 




— 



') 




J 




w 
















(1) 




^ 




H 




(H 




c, 


U 




ffl 


m 


o 




: 




r- 






u 


u 






w 





]) 


■ 


5 
u 


U 

o 

o 




^H 


- 


(N 


a 




u 


u 


G 


b 


in 


'- 


a 


•-= 


II J 




.£ 




c 




a 




<n 




C- 




< 




cn 




1- . 




OJ 












>'. 




->-, 





157 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 



Temple I 





Temple II 



Figure 73 (a), (b) Plans of Temples I and II. 
158 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

B 



Temple 1 1 1 




Figure 73 (c) Plan of Temple III. 



offerings to the chthonic gods. At Barbar the excavators found nearly a hundred 
conical clay beakers, all ritually broken, in the fill of the temple platform. 26 
These beakers were perhaps used in a ritual feast at the time when the 
temple was first inaugurated. A small cylinder-shaped jar of limestone was 
also found under the ramp leading up to the temple. 

The second temple was an extension and enlargement of the first, but it 
broadly followed the same design. The central platform was retained though 
it was raised. It marked the sacred area but it was surrounded by a lower 
terrace, confined by an oval wall, some 66 metres (220 feet) in length; about 
27 metres (90 feet) of the outer wall still remains. To the south of the temple 
a wide staircase, which is still standing, led up to the oval terrace. The foot of 
the staircase, incidentally, marks the ground level as it then was, showing 
how the land has risen over the ensuing forty centuries: this area around the 
temple is still largely unexcavated. 

An additional feature, the 'sacrificial area', was added to the complex at 
this time. It is to be seen to the east of the site: an oval courtyard, lying 
somewhat below the level of the principal terrace and reached by a gradually 
descending ramp. In this area was found a thick layer of ash (still indeed to 
be seen towards the end of the oval, to the right), which contained the burnt 
bones of sacrificial animals. 

The most notable feature of the second temple was the sacred well, or 
spring, perhaps the Apsu' (the Abyss of subterranean waters) of Enki, which 
lies to the west of the platform on which the temple stands. A long staircase, 



159 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

now partly destroyed, led from the terrace to the well, the stone steps actually 
reaching down into the water (Fig. 7.5). The well, like so much of Barbar, is 
constructed from finely cut stone blocks, from stone brought from Bahrain's 
nearby island, Jidda; Temple I, on the other hand, was built from a local 
Bahraini stone. 

That the temples, given their apparent Sumerian connections, are built 
largely of stone is itself of great interest: the Sumerians built in baked mud- 
bricks, their land being entirely bereft of stone, which in Bahrain was plentiful. 
Evidently the island even then possessed skilled craftsmen who could handle 
the fine-grained limestone, working to the designs and instructions of some 
unknown architect who, if not a Dilmunite (though he may well have been), 
knew much about the techniques of building in a material which must largely 
have been strange to the people who apparently inspired the temple's 
construction. 

The second temple in use during the early centuries of the second 
millennium BC was larger again than its predecessors. In the centre of the 
site a square platform was enclosed by a massive stone wall of finely cut 
masonry (Fig. 7.6). Along the wall towards the west and north are remains of 
a room, whilst the platform itself was paved with limestone slabs. Two circular 




Figure 7.4 An isometric drawing of the Barbar temple construction. 



160 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 




Figure 7.5 The sacred well or 'Apsu' at the Barbar temple complex. 



offering-tables of finely cut stone with a low altar between them still stand in 
the middle of the courtyard. East of the offering-tables three stone altars 
once stood. To the south-west, three stone blocks are standing, each pierced 
with a round hole. It was suggested that these were used for tethering the 
sacrificial animals; however, it now seems more likely that they have their 
nearest parallels in the stone anchors, of the type associated, for example, 
with the Sixth Dynasty mastaba of Mereruka, far away to the west in Saqqara, 
Egypt. 27 

In the north-eastern corner of the courtyard was a square pit containing 
rich foundation deposits, all of copper. 28 This is appropriate, since the 
mercantile Dilmun, the secular counterpart of Dilmun the sacred land, 
depended on the copper trade for its exceptional prosperity. 

The third temple's terrace probably covered an area some 15 square metres 
(50 square feet) in extent and faced to the north (Fig. 7.3(c)). It is not known 
for certain whether the sacred well, and the handsome processional staircase 



161 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

that led to it from the temple platform built for the second temple, were 
incorporated into the new structure. Standing high above the surrounding 
buildings, which probably clustered around its walls and the landscape in 
which the whole complex was set, the temple, gleaming white, would have 
been impressive indeed. 

One curious survival from the third temple may still be seen in the gypsum 
mortar orjuss which was used to bond the stones in the wall foundations on 
the west side of the upper terrace and on the floor of another building to the 
north-west of the main temple. The print of a large naked foot is clearly 
impressed in the mortar. 29 A number of footprints and some handprints have 
been found in the temple area; there are also the paw-marks of a dog, showing 
that even in such remote times, where men were, dogs were close by. The 
foot was one of the most frequently employed symbols in the iconography 
of the Dilmun seals which are described later in this survey. However, there 
is no evidence of whether the footprints at Barbar are deliberate or merely 
the consequence of chance, the footsteps of a workman on the site, perhaps 
preserved by accident for the past 4,000 years. The connection between the 
Bahraini temples and springs of fresh water is clear. In the case of Barbar 
three conduits provide outflows, perhaps, to the rather Shakespearian idea 
of 'the three corners of the world'. It may be that the building of temples 
over important springs relates also to the management of water 
resources which, in various forms, has long been a preoccupation of 
the people of the peninsula and the Gulf. The fa laj, the stone-built 




Figure 7.6 The platform on which the second temple at Barbar stood. 

162 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

water conduit, probably originally of Iranian origin, is familiar to anyone 
who has known the Gulf in the recent past. In Bahrain water conduits were 
called qanats; the qanats were generally subterranean. In Oman, where it is 
still to be found, thefala] conduit runs above the surface. In Oman, too, in 
the country districts the auctioning of water still takes place. In antiquity it 
would be entirely consistent with the view of how the world was managed 
for the distribution of water to be in the hands of the priests, supported by 
the temple administrations. It would certainly give support to the clearly 
very important position which Enki, the god of the sweet, subterranean waters, 
occupied in the minds of the Sumerians and, in all probability, of the people 
of the Gulf too. 

Many of the objects which have been recovered from Barbar are of very 
fine quality indeed and testify eloquently to the high standard of culture 
which flourished in Bahrain in the third millennium BC. Barbar produced a 
very distinctive type of pottery (now known as 'Barbar ware'), which was 
first identified on the site. It can be recognized easily by its marked horizontal 
ridging. 

The Sumerians respected the tools of the trades which the people practised. 
Gods were placed in charge of them and poems celebrated their qualities. It 
is not surprising therefore to find at Barbar, in the second temple deposit, a 
copper axe and a copper adze, the one concerned with building, the other 
with agriculture. 30 

Copper 'models' of spearheads and crescent-shaped shaft-hole axes were 
found in the fill of the central platform, as well as beads of marble, lapis 
lazuli and carnelian. Lapis was one of the products frequently identified 
with Dilmun; it was traded as far as Egypt but its only known source is away 
to the east at Badakhshan, in Afghanistan. A small strip of gold was also 
found in the deposit. 31 

Some of the most attractive products of ancient Bahrain recovered from 
the Barbar site are examples of the stamp seals which are so specially identified 
with Bahrain and the Gulf at this time. Several seals were found at Barbar, 
including a group from the sacred well itself. It has been suggested 32 that 
these were thrown into the well in some sort of ritual act, presumably to 
draw to the attention of the resident divinity, Enki himself no doubt or Enshag 
his son, the needs and aspirations of the seals' owners. 

The seals all come from the second temple levels. They are of the developed 
type characteristic of Bahrain and Failaka at the end of the third millennium 
and the early years of the second. 33 This was the time of Dilmun's commercial 
greatness and the seals, in all probability, are the 'trade marks' of merchant 
companies and families based in Bahrain but trading with Sumer in the north, 
Oman in the south and, to the east, the great Indus Valley cities such as 
Moenjo-Daro and Harappa (see Chapter 8) (Fig. 7.7). 

A particularly fine pottery sherd also survives which shows the impression 
of a Dilmun seal very clearly (Fig. 7.8). 34 This was found in the well 

163 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




re 7.7 A group of the characteristic seals from Bahrain at the beginning of the 
second millennium, recovered from the sacred well at Barbar. 



164 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 




Figure 7.8 A pottery sherd bearing the impression of a Dilmun seal. The design is of 
great antiquity; versions of it are found throughout Mesopotamia, Elam and from as 

far away as Egypt. 



at Barbar, and shows a heroic figure grasping two animals by their necks, 
exercising his will over them. 

This design is of great antiquity. It is known from late fourth-millennium 
Sumer, from south-western Iran, where some authorities believed it originated 
and, far away to the east, from Egypt. 35 There its presence in late Predynastic 
times, at the end of the fourth millennium, has prompted speculation about 
the extent of influences from the Gulf and Mesopotamia which Egypt 
experienced at the time immediately before the unification of the two 
Kingdoms of the Nile Valley, under the first kings of Egypt. It was remarked 
earlier that some authorities, including Petrie, have believed that 
Mesopotamian influences came to Egypt by the intervention of 'the islanders 
of the Persian Gulf. 36 

Another Gulf seal shows a heroic figure dominating, in the same manner, 
two huge scorpions . The use of this same motif in this unlikely context suggests 
that it was of great significance in early antiquity. 

Music was a notable feature of all Sumerian religious ceremonies. Many 
representations of musical performance have come down to us, including 
some pleasing scenes featuring animals as the musicians. But in the temple 
ceremonies at Barbar we must assume that solemn and sonorous melodies 
would have risen from the courtyards, to charm the gods. The chanting of 
the priests was no doubt matched by the sound of pipes, harps, flutes and 



165 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

percussion instruments, including drums, rattles and something very like 
modern castanets. 

This concern of Sumerian ritual with music is hinted at in Barbar. Amongst 
the deposits of the second temple was a small copper rattle, perhaps from 
the percussion department of an ancient orchestra; it was associated with the 
most important and handsome find of all, a majestic bull's head, finely cast in 
copper. 37 Though it is supposition, it is possible that this fine piece ornamented 
the sounding-box of a Sumerian lyre, of the type which was found in the 
great death-pit at Ur and so miraculously preserved by Sir Leonard Woolley. 
Stringed instruments bearing richly adorned animal heads were characteristic 
of Sumerian temple and royal ceremonies and it is certainly possible that the 
Barbar bull-head served this pleasant purpose. A Dilmun seal from Failaka, 
which from the beginning of the second millennium was part, in all probability, 
of Dilmun's 'empire', shows a bull-headed lyre of just this sort (Fig. 7.9). 3K 

The artefacts recovered from Barbar are among the most important to be 
found anywhere in the Gulf; they contribute much to an understanding of 
the religious practices and beliefs of the Dilmunites of 4,000 years and more 
ago. Within the precincts of the first and most ancient temple was a double 
line of cut stone blocks, eight in all, set by the temple's western side. Cut into 
the blocks' upper surfaces were two square holes (in one case, three 
holes) which were originally lined with a copper sheeting, bonded to the 




Figure 7.9 A Dilmun seal (from Failaka island) which shows a bull-headed lyre 
and an enigmatic scene which may be of the sacrifice of a second bull. 

166 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

stone with bitumen. Through the copper, nails had been driven, their points 
inwards and in some cases with wood still adhering to them. It seems likely 
that they were either the supports for wooden columns or for the bases of 
wooden statues: the third hole in one of the blocks could be explained as 
having secured a staff or wand carried by one of the figures. On the side of 
one of the blocks two figures of men are roughly carved, one with down- 
turned arms, the other with his arms raised, the fingers of each hand splayed 
out. 39 This particular block seems now to have left the site; it was not found 
when the temples were re-excavated in 1983- 

Though the remains of the second temple are much the best preserved 
and extensive on the site, the third temple at Barbar was probably 
architecturally the most complex and sophisticated. By the time it was built 
the consecrated area, the main sanctuary, was raised high above the 
surrounding landscape. A double circular stone plinth supported the temple's 
principal altars with, facing them, a stone seat or throne with a libation altar 
before it. A pit of offerings, stone-lined and thus deliberately built as an 
integral part of the temple, like its Sumerian parallels, was found beyond this 
altar and in it were alabaster vases, the copper figures of a naked worshipper, 
perhaps a priest (which may originally have served as a handle of a mirror) 
and of a bird. Three of the alabaster vases were virtually in perfect condition, 
the others in fragments: similar ones have been discovered at Ur and can be 
ascribed to the end of the third millennium. 40 A large well, associated with 
the third temple, has not yet been excavated. 

An extensive collection of the horizontally ridged type of pottery, which 
is now known as Barbar after its find-site, has been recovered; the other 
most distinctive Bahraini pottery is the 'chain-ridge' ware. Some of this pottery 
would seem to have been exported to Sumer, for examples have been found 
in Early Dynastic tombs in Ur. A stone vessel decorated with concentric 
circles is also similar to others found in Ur burials of the same period. 41 

As would be expected in what appears to have been the most important 
sanctuary on an island whose ancient economy was derived, to a significant 
degree, from the copper trade, a considerable number of copper (and later, 
bronze) artefacts has been recovered from Barbar. Among them were 
numerous arrowheads of a type which once again recalls similar examples 
from Ur, and a quantity of copper axeheads. Many of the axes recovered 
from Bahraini sites are purely votive and could never have been functional. 
The 'Dilmun axe', it will be remembered, appeared in the earliest inscription 
relating to the land at the end of the fourth millennium. 42 

The presence at Barbar of the fine bull- or ox-head mentioned earlier, 
with its great upcurving horns, provides an echo of that remote time when 
the predecessors of the Sumerians were beginning to develop the most 
important characteristics of their splendid and beneficent culture. The bull- 
or ox-head, the 'bucranium', is one of the earliest pictographs and was used 
to symbolize, reasonably enough, an ox. This sign appears on the earliest 

167 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

tablets of what was to develop into formal writing: the early pictographs 
developed successively through abstractions of the original ox-head shape 
to the final cuneiform characters. 43 The ox-head is also the ancestor of the 
aleph and the alpha and, ultimately, of the Roman a. 

The bucranium was a powerful symbol from as early as the Anatolian 
settlement of Catal Huyiik on the Konya plain. There, bull-heads were set up 
as elements in the design of the shrines which were so important a feature of 
this little proto-'city'. 44 Similarly, Egypt honoured the bull-head; in one of the 
First Dynasty royal tombs at Saqqarah a number of bulls' skulls were placed 
on a low platform at the sides of the tomb of a great noble of the reign of 
King Den. 45 Queen Her-Neith, again of the First Dynasty, was also buried in 
a tomb decorated with the skulls of bulls. 46 

In the Gulf the bucranium appears frequently as a motif on the seals 
which are peculiar to the culture of the region. The bucranium was, from the 
very earliest period, a favoured motif in Mesopotamian design, where it 
underwent many refinements and adaptations, moving from the naturalistic 
to a more and more abstract interpretation, a development which was repeated 
in its progress from pictograph to cuneiform. It is particularly striking in the 
beautiful, very early pottery from Halafian sites in northern Mesopotamian 
sites: in a stylized form it is also found in the repertory of Ubaid potters and 
painters. 



THE DIVINITIES OF BARBAR 

It is possible only to speculate about the god or gods who were worshipped 
at Barbar. Although the most important divinity to be worshipped in Dilmun 
was probably Enki, other Sumerian deities were identified with the island. 
Thus, Inanna was worshipped in a temple at Ur called E-Dilmun-na, 
commemorating her links with the island. 47 Dilmun was a land of the gods, 
and it is not surprising, therefore, that majestic temples should have been set 
up there in their honour, though the sheer number of them in so small and 
remote an island is deeply puzzling. The kings of Sumer congratulated 
themselves on their piety in restoring the temples when they fell into decay. 
Warad-Sin (second half of the nineteenth century BC), in a long inscription 
in Ur which refers to E-Dilmun-na, says: 

For Inanna the lady clad in great splendour wielding all the powers, 
eldest daughter of Sin, his lady: Warad-Sin, the prince who favours 
Nippur, nourisher of Ur, who takes thought for Girsu with Lagash, who 
reverences E-barra, King of Larsa, King of Sumer and Akkad, the strong 
one who seeks out the [divine] oracles and executes their purpose, 
who builds anew the house of the gods, am I: on whom Enki bestowed 
a wide understanding to perform the duties of the City. Because of this, 

168 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

for Inanna my lady, with my prayer [I restored] E-Dilmun-na her dwelling 
of rest and of heart's delight. That the eye might see and its interior 
might be liked I enlarged its area more than before. Unto days to come 
for my life I built it: its head I raised and made like a mountain. Over 
my works may Inanna my lady rejoice. Length of days, years of 
abundance, a throne securely based, a sceptre to subdue the people as 
a gift may she grant me. 48 

E-Dilmun-na seems always to have been of special significance to the 
Sumerians, again perhaps because of the nature of Dilmun itself. If it was 
'the place of assembly' of the people, and not only of their gods, on their 
journey to Sumer, this is understandable enough. The cult centre of Sin- 
Nanna was at Ur, at the edge of the desert out of which poured perpetually 
floods of wild nomads who variously threatened and were absorbed by 
the Sumerian cities, eventually enriching them immeasurably but at the 
expense of their survival. Sin-Nanna was one of the greatest of the gods 
and many cities other than Ur honoured him with temples and shrines. The 
successive levels of Sin temples found at Khafajah show that, from the 
earliest times, the moon-god was a divinity to whom worship was elaborately 
given. It has been observed that the moon is the prototype of the universal 
god to desert people and that the Semitic tribes followed this belief. Moon 
temples were built by the pre-Islamic Arabs who, like their ancestors, 
considered the planet mild and beneficent, an understandable view for a 
people who had to endure the daily torments of the sun at its height. Thus, 
it is argued, Sin-Nanna would naturally be a god of special significance 
and affection to the people of the desert as they first settled in the city of 
Ur, on the desert's fringe. 



TEMPLE OVALS 

In the light of the discovery of a temple at Barbar in Bahrain, which is very 
similar in at least one important respect to the temple built to the glory of Sin 
in Khafajah, it is interesting that a fragment from a hymn to the moon-god 
speaks of 'the temple [Sagnamsar] which is the mount of Dilmun'. It seems 
wholly possible that this refers to a temple complex in Dilmun, perhaps that 
at Barbar itself. Whilst the hymn is addressed to Sin-Nanna, some 
commentators have seen the divinity being celebrated as the ubiquitous 
Enki. This view is strengthened by one interpretation of Sagnamsar as meaning 
that it is consecrated to the Benefactor of Writing, an appropriate epithet for 
the god of wisdom. 49 

However, it is not only in Mesopotamia that oval-terraced temple 
structures are to be found. In Upper Egypt, at Hierakonpolis, an oval 
revetment contains a roughly square temple enclosure, a combination of 

169 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

features strikingly un-Egyptian; indeed, the Hierakonpolis temple is 
unparalleled in the whole of Egypt. 50 

Hierakonpolis was the original capital of the line of princes which was 
credited, throughout Egyptian history, with the unification of the Nile Valley 
Kingdoms. It was the location of the richly endowed 'Main Deposit', which 
contained such artefacts as the Nar-mer Palette (on which there are 
iconographic elements like the powerful man mastering lions which is also 
to be found in the Gulf and which originated in Western Asia) and a superb 
golden falcon-head. It was also at Hierakonpolis that the celebrated painted 
tomb Tomb 100' was found; its walls were plastered and painted with a 
sequence of vignettes, many of which are echoed in the design compendium 
of the Gulf, though a millennium later. 51 

There is too great a gap between the accepted date of the Hierakonpolis 
examples (c. 2800 BC at the generally accepted latest estimate) and the Gulf 
examples (c. 2000 BC at the earliest) for the conclusion to be reached that 
they are in some direct way associated. Their appearance in both cultures is, 
however, puzzling and highly suggestive, given their very distinctive character 
and their precise duplication. 

Two recent studies on the meaning of the name 'Barbar' are of interest in 
that, whilst both of them point to quite different conclusions, each suggests 
that the origin of the name may reach back to the time when the temples 
themselves were flourishing. 'Barbar' is not an Arabic word: its meaning 
must therefore be sought elsewhere. 

One study 52 suggests that 'Barbar' may convey the meaning 'foreigners': 
this would imply that the builders of the temples were not indigenous to 
Bahrain and were identified by the local Dilmunites as such. However, the 
same authority goes on to note that Samas, the sun-god, a significant divinity 
in Sumer and, like Enki, generally well disposed to man, was worshipped in 
the Sumerian city of Larsa in temples called e-babbar, which, he notes, is 
usually translated as the 'White House'. In Sumerian bab bar also meant 
'sunrise' and Dilmun was celebrated as the Land of Sunrise. 

Several of the Bahraini sites known to date, which have as their most 
prominent element a temple or important shrine, prompt questions about 
the sacred and particular character of the island in Sumerian times. All Sumerian 
cities were built around the temple, which, in most cases, was the original 
reason for their being brought into existence. The process of city-making is 
complex and various: in the case of the Sumerian proto-cities it seems likely 
that they began as cult centres, serving the needs of a group of villages and 
settlements of which the city in its beginnings formed the nucleus. The city 
was consecrated to one or several of the gods; it belonged to them. No city 
was ever built without its temple. 

In the city built at the site of the Qala'at al-Bahrain, all the buildings so far 
excavated there are secular, consecrated to trade rather than to the honour 
of the gods, with the exception of one large hall which bears some resemblance 

170 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

to the style of temple structures. Yet Dilmun was a land of temples; such 
areas in the north of the island that have as yet been surveyed confirm the 
presence of many large structures and each site that has been excavated, 
other than the tomb fields, has produced a crop of sacred buildings. In the 
region of Barbar, for example, there is little doubt that further excavations 
will produce more temples. 

The explanation, of course, may lie in the reputation for exceptional sanctity 
that the entire island enjoyed. 53 It was the whole island, perhaps, that was 
the cult centre, consecrated for ever to the High Gods. The waters 
encompassed it instead of the walls of other, land-locked centres. Within its 
sea-girded walls everything would have been sacred, the equivalent of the 
temenos, the sacred enclosure in every Sumerian city. If the main temple was 
located at Barbar (and indeed if it does not still await discovery) 6 kilometres 
(4 miles) or so from the city, this would not have been a material consideration; 
city and temples alike would all have been contained within the island's 
own holy precincts. In truth Dilmun was the first, the archetypal Holy Land, 
the place of assembly not only of the people but of the gods. 



THE ARCHITECTURE OF BARBAR 

The architecture of Barbar temples reveals a high standard of technical 
competence, particularly in the careful shaping of the ashlar blocks from 
which the structures and the great well or bath were built. The area of sacrifice 
contained a number of blocks which, when assembled, formed two circular 
structures; around the temples a wall was built which also curved gently at 
its corners. Parts of the ashlar walls demonstrate one interesting characteristic: 
an irregular shaping of the stone courses which fit into each other, a technique 
of strengthening stone walls more typical of Egypt in the third millennium 
than of Sumer. Indeed, the assurance with which stone is handled both at 
Qala'at al-Bahrain and at Barbar is reminiscent more of the authority with 
which Egyptians built than of the work of Sumerian architects. However, the 
technique of stone-building at Barbar and some of the other early second- 
millennium sites also recalls the methods of using relatively small, cut stones 
in the earlier architecture from Umm an-Nar and it is very probably from this 
direction that Bahrain's architectural traditions came. 

The ashlar stonework, large and finely cut blocks, at Barbar is characteristic of 
the later temples; in the first structure the stones are small, packed together 
tightly. They suggest an unfamiliarity with the properties of stone on a large 
scale: indeed, they have prompted speculation whether they may not represent 
the work of craftsmen who were only beginning to find their way in its use, in 
contrast with the assurance with which the later monumental courses are handled. 54 

The site at Barbar is certainly the most important in the Arabian Gulf yet to 
be discovered. It was first uncovered by the Danes between 1955 and 1963; 55 

171 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

after its first clearance the site was backfilled for its protection. It was then 
decided, in 1983, to clear its previously excavated areas and to conserve the 
remains as a monument, so that visitors could comprehend something of its 
extent and significance. This has now been achieved, under the control of 
Bahrain's Department of Antiquities. 56 



OTHER BAHRAIN SITES 

There are many other sites of archaeological importance in Bahrain. There is 
an increasing awareness of their significance amongst the archaeological 
community, alerted originally by the Danish excavations. 

One such site, at Umm es-Sejour, 1.5 kilometres (a mile) to the west of 
Diraz, has produced some unexpected finds, which may bear upon the 
question of the religious character of the island. The site is a small well- 
temple which achieved a later celebrity when, according to legend, the Caliph 
Abdul Malik Ibn Marwan, incensed at the Bahrainis' reversion to their ancient 
gods in the early years of Islam, invaded the island and destroyed the well as 
a punishment for the people's heterodoxy. 57 However, long before this, there 
was a sacred building here and in its ruins were found the headless statues 
of two stone animals. They were probably the ornaments of a portal or the 
decoration of a shrine built in the high days of Dilmun's influence, in the late 
third millennium before our era; carved in limestone, the animals have been 
decapitated by some zealot who, presumably, disapproved enough of them 
to wish to ensure their ritual 'killing'. 

Considerable interest had been kindled in 1971 in archaeological circles 
by the identification of Ubaid pottery on eastern Arabian sites principally at 
Ain Qannas, Dosariyah and Abu Khamis.' 8 The Arabian sites had been expertly 
and professionally excavated: Ubaid pottery had been found at Al-Da'asa, at 
Ras Abaruk, Dukhan and in the region of Bir Zikrit in Qatar. 59 Up to this point 
no such very early pottery had been found in Bahrain. 

In 1973 a small British team was sent to Bahrain to work on three sites 
which had previously been identified as being likely to repay effort. These 
were Al-Markh, Diraz East, near the 'Well of the Bulls' dug by the Danes in 
the 1950s, and a later site at Jannusan North. The initiative for this expedition 
was taken by the committee formed in the aftermath of the 1970 Conference 
(see Chapter 2). The British worked in Bahrain from 1973 until 1978. 60 



AL MARKH 

The British team selected Al-Markh as a consequence of some sherds having 
been found on the surface of the site and identified as Ubaid in 1971. 61 Al- 
Markh lies inland from the west coast, south of the village of Zallaq. It is a 

172 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

low, sand-covered mound and north and east of it are sabkha, the treacherous 
flats where evaporation has produced a fragile crust of impacted sand. There 
are considerable quantities of flint and offish and other animal bones scattered 
about. 

The expedition found and excavated a number of what they believed to 
be fire pits used for the preparation of food. They detected two phases on 
the site, the earlier one when fish were predominantly represented in the 
remains and a later one when mammal bones became significant and when 
meat evidently formed an important part of the diet of the site's occupants. 
The animals represented included the Bahrain hare, which still lives around 
the site, the dugong, the sea-cow which breeds in the bay between Bahrain 
and Qatar, and, most frequently, the goat. A change in the technique of 
catching fish was suggested to the excavators by the fact that in the earlier 
levels the fish species tended to be small whilst in the later ones they were 
generally larger and 'included more carnivorous fish'. It was suggested that 
these 'may have been caught by hook and line, by harpoon or by bow and 
arrow'. A greater density of flints would have been needed to butcher the 
larger mammals and larger fish than would have been required for the small 
species. 62 

A statistical analysis of the pottery sherds found at Al-Markh led to the 
conclusion, at first sight surprising, that only in the earlier occupations of 
the site had pottery been used. The sherds are painted and are dated to c. 
3800 BC. 63 

It seems most likely that there was no permanent settlement at Al-Markh 
at this early fourth-millennium date, but rather that it was occupied seasonally 
by hunters or fishermen coming from some other place, possibly from southern 
Mesopotamia and from the contemporary Arabian sites which also had access 
to Ubaid pottery. The somewhat higher level of the Gulf at the time would 
have meant that Al-Markh would have been a small island. It would be 
interesting to know more about the people who used the site then and, 
particularly, of how and by what means they sailed to the island, presumably 
from the Arabian shore, some 20 kilometres away. But of this sort of 
information, not surprisingly, the little site at Al-Markh, sparse even by the 
most austere standards of desert archaeology, communicates nothing. 



DIRAZ EAST 

Diraz East, the other important site to be dug by the British expedition, 64 is 
part of a substantial third-millennium settlement in the fertile northern sector 
of the island. It has always been fertile and has been inhabited consistently 
at least since the Barbar period. An isolated Ubaid sherd was found there. 

What appear to be the remains of an important building was described 
by its excavators as 'a temple'; since a partly destroyed altar was 

173 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




Figure 7.10 A small, evidently sacred building at Diraz East, notable for the large 
columns which presumably supported some substantial upper storey. 



found in the remains of the building, this seems reasonable enough (Fig. 
7.10). The building itself is notable for the rows of large columns which 
originally stood inside it. There was a large stone and mortar basin adjacent 
to the building, though this was suspected of being later in date than the 
building itself, perhaps of the Late Babylonian period. Sherds from pottery 
of this time were found and in one of the rooms the burials of at least five 
persons, dating from Late Babylonian times, were discovered. A 'snake bowl', 
like the ones from the Qala'at al-Bahrain, was found but it was empty. Two 
crude stamp seals were also found. 65 

Because of its value as an agricultural area, many of Diraz's ancient sites 
have been disturbed. The discovery of the temple at Diraz East is significant, 
however, for if it is third millennium in origin, then it is quite unlike any 
other building of the period known from Bahraini sites. Interestingly, if only 
because of the frequency with which the creature is portrayed on Dilmun 
seals, Diraz is notorious for the number of scorpions which abound there 
and which, even now, make excavation difficult. 66 To this day the scorpion, 
so often shown circling the seals and in the designs they display, seems to 
guard Diraz from intruders. 

A brief excavation was conducted by the British Expedition at Aali East 
which uncovered a double-chambered tomb of the seventh century BC. 



174 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

Though the tomb had been conscientiously robbed in antiquity, three seals 
have been overlooked. A cylinder seal, dating to c. 650 BC, is of neo- 
Babylonian form. A stamp seal with the round boss on the reverse is obviously 
derived from the much earlier Dilmun seals and may, the excavators suggest, 
have been an heirloom or a treasured possession of whoever took it with 
them into the tomb. 



THE BURIAL MOUNDS 

Little has yet been said about the people who lived on the island during the 
long centuries of its most expansive period. This is for the simple reason that 
little is known of them: very few remains have been found outside the principal 
sites, and little evidence of how the people lived. From examinations of their 
skeletal remains, it seems probable that they were a healthy people, somewhat 
taller than their present-day successors, and relatively long-lived, a quality 
entirely appropriate for the island of the gods, where all had once been 
perfection. 67 

Remarkably, the Dilmunites of the third and second millennia appear to 
have practised dentistry of a quite sophisticated order. 68 A number of skulls 
have produced evidence of carious teeth extracted in life. Only the Egyptians 
could claim a comparable clinical technology so early: Hesy-re, a Third 
Dynasty nobleman buried at Saqqarah, was, amongst his other attainments, 
a dentist, as recorded in his tomb. 69 The early Dilmunites had a diet high in 
carbohydrates, notably the dates for which Dilmun was famous, and in 
consequence suffered from caries. All the early inhabitants, on the evidence 
of their skulls, were Caucasoid. 

Whilst it may be said that there is comparatively little known of how men 
lived in Bahrain, there is abundant evidence of how they were treated after 
death. The last of Bahrain's major archaeological phases, which at its earliest 
probably overlapped with the later centuries of the Sumerian period, is 
represented by its gigantic graveyards. 

The earliest mound burials in Bahrain appear to be of the same architectural 
design as those built in Umm an-Nar, in Abu Dhabi (Fig. 7.11). These date 
from the middle of the third millennium and may represent the burials of the 
first settlers in Bahrain. 

To judge from the Ziusudra episode in the Epic of Gilgamesh (Chapter 
10), it would not be unreasonable to suppose that, in addition to its sacred 
and mercantile characters, Dilmun was conceived as an island of the dead, a 
prototype of that strange and evocative concept of the mortuary isle which 
looms, shrouded in mist and lapped by the water of death, in so many later 
mythologies. Whilst there is no doubt that the island's city could provide a 
substantial number of candidates for the tombs over the centuries, it is only 
very recently that anyone has attempted to compute the likely numbers buried 

175 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

in the island and from that to extrapolate the inhabitants of the city. 70 From 
these studies it appears that a population of 4,500 people will, over a period 
of 1,000 years, account for 128,000 dead. The figure of 4,500 is probably low 
as the mean for the Dilmunite population during the time of its greatest 
prosperity; the island could thus easily provide the numbers required to fill 
the grave mounds. 

Whilst it may be tempting to think that Dilmun may have been like Abydos 
in Egypt or, more recently, Kerbala in Iraq (as Durand proposed), widely 
recognized as a desirable place in which to be buried, there is no evidence 
of the dead being brought to Dilmun for burial. It must in consequence be 
assumed that most of those buried there are native to the island. But the 
presence of similar tombs on the mainland suggests that there must have 
been some sort of mortuary cult in Dilmun as a whole. There is, of course, 
nothing to prevent the island and mainland Dilmun serving both as a place 
to which the dead were brought and as a flourishing mercantile kingdom 
with a substantial population who lived on the profits of its many-faceted 
trade. Indeed, it has been suggested that some of the prosperity which was 
so evident a feature of life in Dilmun may have been the consequence of the 
stream of visitors who came to the island to bring their dead to its holy 
shores. 71 There are, after all, plenty of parallels for such practical benefits 
from the exercise of religion. Nothing, however, has ever been found in the 
mound burials in Bahrain to suggest that the occupants of the tombs were 
foreigners to Dilmun. 

It has now been calculated that there may be at least 170,000 tombs in the 
Bahrain deserts. 72 The fields of tumuli create a curious undulating effect in 
the desert, stretching on and on to the horizon. So closely packed are they 
that it would now often be difficult to build a new one between the ancient 
mounds. Many today are broken hillocks of rubble and sand collapsed on 
their stone-lined chambers, and are sometimes difficult to recognize. Others 
still rise to more dramatic heights, their contours firm but with their sepulchral 
chambers empty; in one group, at Aali village, some of the mounds still 
stand over 12 metres (40 feet) high with a diameter of more than 30 metres 
(100 feet). There is still some debate on the structure of the mounds in antiquity. 
Some authorities have it that they show today the general shape in which 
they were built, rounded mounds of sand and rubble raised over a stone- 
built interior. 73 Others take the view, which is gaining support, that the mounds 
were enclosed within high ring-walls; 74 in some cases a form of terracing has 
been identified, recalling both the Mesopotamian ziggurat and the earliest 
mastaba tombs and pyramids in Egypt, which were stepped or terraced. If 
the mounds were enclosed with stone walls rising to the substantial height 
which the diameter of the mounds as they exist today would suggest, they 
would have been formidable monuments. 

The great tombs at Aali, which are further described below, are generally 
thought to have conformed to this architectural form, which is otherwise 

176 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

unknown from any other Near Eastern site. Interestingly, Mackay, when he 
visited Bahrain in 1926 75 and surveyed the Aali mounds, came to the conclusion 
both that they were originally of a considerable height and that terracing was 
a feature of the smaller mounds which were contemporary with them. They 
were, in effect, funerary towers. 

There seems to have been something of a preoccupation with towers 
amongst the architects of monumental buildings in the Gulf in antiquity. The 
Aali tombs are towers, and towers were built, for defensive purposes, from 
very early times in Oman. At the other end of the Gulf, on Failaka island, a 
high tower near the shore would have been visible to seamen approaching 
the island from far off (see Chapter 8). 76 

The tumulus fields of Bahrain are of immense proportions, extending 
over 3 square kilometres (2 or more square miles); they are widely scattered 
over the island, even extending down to the desert lands of the south. The 
larger proportion of the mounds comes from the time of Dilmun's height of 
prosperity, from the end of the third millennium and the beginning of the 
second. Two principal types have been identified: the earlier without 
capstones, the later with them. Some underground burials have also been 
found and there seems to have been a return to mound building in Hellenistic 
times. Various forms of structure have been identified: the earliest small 




Figure 7.11 The occupant of a grave of Umm an-Nar type at Medinet Hamed; third 

millennium BC. 



177 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

and compact with corbelled roofs a metre (3 feet) in height, and the later, 
much larger tumuli with provision for multiple burials, probably, in effect, 
family mausolea, or the resting-places of people linked by clan ties. 77 

The doorways of the tombs, high and strongly built, tend to be turned 
towards the west, looking towards the region where the sun dies. The 
dead generally lie with their heads towards the north-east; often the hands 
of the dead are placed in front of the face. Perhaps the occupants of the 
tombs were, like the Egyptians, able thus to enjoy the sunset when, 
gathering at the doorways of the tombs, their spirits could daily watch 
the sun set out upon the journey which they had already taken. The 
westerly orientation of the tombs suggests elements of a solar faith and 
the recognition of the sun's divinity, and it will be recalled that Utu, the 
sun-god of the Sumerians, lived in Dilmun. It has also been suggested 78 
that the entrances to the tombs are aligned to Venus at sunset, recalling 
the supposed stellar orientation of the shafts of the pyramids at Giza, 
where, when they were built, the light of the Pole Star may have shone 
directly down them. 

It is curious that tumulus or mound burials are found in a great arc from 
the Near East to Ireland, and in parts of northern Europe the mounds heaped 
up over the graves of chieftains assumed a size and splendour equalled only 
by the tholos tombs of the Mycenaeans, the pyramids of the Kings of Egypt 
or the huge mound-towers of the Dilmunite rulers. The tholos itself may 
have originated in Western Asia, where houses in the forms of tholoi are 
known from northern Iraq, though the evidence comes from so early a period 
that it must be uncertain. 

The mound burials also recall the great structures of the European Early 
and Middle Bronze Ages, the megaliths, the groups of standing-stones which, 
often following the meander or the circle, are said to represent the Mother 
Goddess. Stonehenge is the most celebrated of them, whilst Avebury and 
Carnac are almost of comparable significance and power; with them earth 
burials are invariably associated. Even the pyramids, those most titanic of all 
funerary monuments, may have originated, in the opinion of some scholars, 
in the little mounds of sand heaped over the modest graves of Predynastic 
chieftains. 79 

The Bahrain tumuli are generally stone-lined, with well-cut blocks, and 
are designed to make a secure resting-place for the dead. Behind the building 
of such permanent burial places lies the belief in the continued survival of 
the individual after death, although this is not a belief typical of all early 
Semitic peoples, many of whom seem rather to have believed in the extinction 
of all personality once death had ended the earthly existence. 

Until recent years only a few of the Bahrain mounds had been opened 
professionally, except by that long-established group, the robbers of tombs. 
It would be very unlikely that many (if indeed any) of such obvious 
monuments, built with no attempt to conceal them, could have escaped 

178 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

depredation. But from the fragmentary remains that have been found scattered 
in the tombs it is possible to reconstruct some idea of what they originally 
contained. 

Usually the body was placed either on its side in the attitude of sleep or 
seated, facing the tomb's entrance. The extreme humidity of the Bahrain 
climate has not allowed the survival of human remains other than bones and 
skulls, usually fragmented and scattered — the work of the small desert 
creatures which live among and inside the tombs. 

There are few hints of the riches the tombs might once have contained. 
Certainly much pottery has been recovered, indicating a ritual of placing 
offerings or providing the means of sustaining the spirit after death. Copper 
and bronze artefacts, swords, daggers and dress ornaments have all left their 
traces in the tombs. A fairly high degree of material luxury is indicated by the 
ivory which has sometimes been found amongst the debris of the tombs, 
suggesting in at least one case that the corpse was laid upon a bed decorated 
with ivory carvings and ornaments. One little ivory figurine, itself fragmentary, 
has been found: a girl, slender-waisted and wide-hipped, her latter feature 
recalling, though in a greatly refined degree, the steatopygous figures of the 
goddess from early times, which were carved with monstrously enlarged 
thighs and buttocks. 80 It seems likely that many such small statues were placed 
in the tombs: the torso of another was found by one of the early excavators 
in Bahrain. They may have been representations of the dead, guardian 
divinities, or servants. 

In one Bahraini tomb, excavated by Mackay in 1925, some very curious 
ivory objects were found. They appeared to be wands or sceptres which 
seemed to have been broken deliberately and cast into the tomb. 81 What 
significance the broken wands held is unknown: perhaps their destruction 
marked the dead man's final break with this world. Similar ivory wands have 
been found in the Indus Valley. 

In several of the tombs the remains of what appeared to be ivory caskets 
were discovered amongst other ivory fragments, including spindle-whorls, 
so decayed, however, that it was virtually impossible to reconstruct them, or 
to guess what they once contained. 82 

The examination of the ivories found in the Bahraini tombs originally 
produced the view, which was frequently asserted, that they were of 
Phoenician workmanship. However, the Phoenicians flourished much later 
than the time when the Bahraini tumuli were built; it is likely that the ivories 
are simply another link with the cities of Sumer for, whilst little has remained, 
due to the climate of southern Mesopotamia, it is known that ivory was 
widely used in the cities and that it was recorded as one of the important 
goods trans-shipped through Dilmun. It must be remembered, too, that much 
ivory was imported through Dilmun from the Indus Valley. Another possibly 
Sumerian connection has been provided by the quantity of bronze pins found 
in the tombs, similar to those with which the Mesopotamians fixed their 

179 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

characteristic 'buns', the most common coiffure favoured by them in the 
latter centuries of their existence. 83 



THE ROYAL TOMBS' AT AALI 



At Aali village, now the centre of a local pottery industry, is the most remarkable 
group of tombs in Bahrain, concentrated together within a relatively compact 
area (Fig. 7.12). There are some twenty of them, all exceptionally large, and 
many of them still rise to impressive heights. It seems likely, from their size and 
certain other evidence described below, that these are the tombs of ancient 
chiefs, perhaps even of the kings of Dilmun. They conform, except in their great 
size, to the general pattern of the islands' graves of the Early Bronze Age period: 
a central shaft, stone-lined, with two niches at the head of the shaft forming a T- 
section. These, it is assumed, were for offerings placed by the head of the corpse. 
A peculiar feature of these tombs is that, after the sand and rubble had been 
heaped up high over the burial, a high circular surrounding wall was built to 
enclose the tumulus. Thus the tombs would have looked like gigantic, up-ended 
cylinders crowned by a dome of sand — very strange monuments indeed. They 
may, however, have perpetuated the tradition of the building of towers 
which seem to have been one of the most typical architectural forms to 
have originated in the Gulf. Towers were elements in most of the settlements, 




Figure 7. 12 The 'Royal Tombs' at Aali 
180 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 




Figure 7.13 Three fine goblets, assembled from fragments recovered from a grave 
mound at Aali, late third millennium BC. 



from Oman to Failaka; the kings of Dilmun (if it is they who were buried in 
the tombs at Aali) may have chosen, hopefully, to spend eternity in still 
greater towers. 

Durand, as earlier reported, had surveyed this part of Bahrain during his 
1878-9 visit and had recorded his impressions of Aali. 84 He left behind some 
notable drawings of the village as it was then, showing a far greater density 
of mounds than is evident today. 85 The Danish Expedition, in the early 1950s, 
recognized the importance of the site and mounted their largest-scale 
excavation there. 

In the 1961-2 season the Danes recovered some striking pottery vessels 
from one of the Aali tumuli. 86 The tomb had been robbed at an unknown 
date, but a trail of potsherds, found in the tunnel cut by the robbers into the 
tomb chamber, enabled the archaeologists to reassemble them and so present 
a 'suite' consisting of two handsome goblets, elegantly proportioned and 
painted with a geometric decoration in black on a red slip, and three slender- 
walled cups (Fig. 7.13). In type the goblets recall an early design found in 
Iran and Pakistan and can be dated to the second half of the third millennium. 
It is known that ostrich eggs made to serve as drinking-vessels were also 
placed in the tombs, recalling a particularly Sumerian practice; similar deposits 
were found in the burials of Early Dynastic Ur and Kish. 87 

But one object in particular from the Aali tombs testified to links more 
distant still and to connections even with remote and legendary Troy. The 
object, slightly smaller than a man's thumbnail, is a gold quatrefoil meander, 
the four spiral shapes being linked by a central bar. 88 It is extremely finely 

181 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

made and indicates a very high degree of metal-working craftsmanship to 
which the princes of Dilmun had access. The shape is a familiar one, associated 
throughout the Near East and right across Europe with Early Bronze Age 
burials. It is particularly identified with the practice of mound burial and 
examples very similar to the Aali fragment have been found as far west as 
Greece, as well as at Troy. 89 Further west still, the same spiral or meander 
shape, cut into massive stones, is the most frequent motif on the large barrow 
tombs of Ireland. 90 Two recently published examples, which appear to be 
identical with that from Aali, come from the hoard of Aegean gold acquired 
by the Boston Museum, which, from the gold cylinder seal bearing the 
cartouches of two Egyptian kings, can be dated to the twenty-fifth century 
BC. 91 This corresponds well with the upper limits of the estimated age of the 
principal Aali tumuli. 

These gold ornaments seem to have been identified throughout the ancient 
world with royal burials. That one should have been discovered as far south 
as Bahrain is quite unexpected and it suggests a much closer connection 
with the burial practices of the great civilizations of the ancient world in the 
third millennium than could ever have been reasonably anticipated. It also 
suggests a high degree of sophistication and luxury and, sadly, confirms the 
view that the original contents of the tombs must have been well worth the 
plundering. This one tiny gold object is, in all probability, a proof of the rich 
and splendid treasures originally buried with the kings, as splendid perhaps 
as anything buried with the great magnates of Egypt or, nearer Bahrain still, 
the persons, royalty or victims, who lay in the Royal Tombs at Ur. 

It has long been suggested that the Aali tombs represent royal burials 
through successive generations, beginning around the middle of the third 
millennium (though this would now seem to be rather too early an estimate) 
and continuing into the early centuries of the second. In several of the tombs, 
the bones of rams and sheep may be the remains of sacrifices, performed at 
the threshold before the tomb was sealed. Some of the tombs show that they 
have been reused at various periods since their construction: material of 
much later times has been found in one or two of them. In one tomb, opened 
by Prideaux during his visits to Bahrain in 1905-6 and again in 1908, two 
pottery jars were found in each of which was a handful of dates, recalling the 
significance which the date had for so long in the economy of Dilmun. 92 

Many more of the tumuli have been destroyed over the years by villagers 
using the stones to build their own houses, and, in recent times, by the 
demands of the Aali pottery. In recent years, road building and other phases 
of Bahrain's modern development programmes have added to the destruction 
of the tombs. However, they can still produce splendid objects: a very fine 
copper drinking-cup was excavated in recent years by the Department of 
Antiquities (Fig. 7.14). 

Grave mounds similar to those most characteristic of Bahrain have been 
found directly to the west in Saudi Arabia, at Abqaiq near Hofuf, at Dhahran 

182 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

and at other mainland sites. 93 Relatively little work has been done on these 
tumuli, compared with those in Bahrain but their methods of construction 
and the similarity of the pottery which they have yielded suggest the same 
origins as the Bahraini burials. To judge by the similarity of the mounds and 
their contents, the populations of the Bahrain island and those on the mainland 
to the west of them were very similar, in all essential respects, a situation 
which after all persists to this day. It is probable that the people of the 
settlements in eastern Arabia were the residue from which it is presumed the 
Bahrain islands were populated after the middle of the third millennium. 



AN EARLY SETTLEMENT AT SAR 

Work is continuous on the Bahraini tomb-fields, for they are so immense 
that, inevitably, modern development is constantly requiring the destruction 
of many areas of them annually. The archaeologists try, at best, to keep 
ahead of the bulldozers. Near the village of Sar, where the mounds are 
particularly densely concentrated, 94 extending over many acres, several types 
of tomb, different from others on the island, have been identified; one rises 
high above the plain and is ringed by smaller subsidiary burials, for all the 
world like the burials of retainers around the great mastabas of the early 
kings of Egypt. 95 But this cannot be, for the dates of the Sar tombs are from 
early in the second millennium, nearly a thousand years after the practice 
was discontinued in Egypt. The tomb at Sar may merely be that of some 
great man or a particularly revered or patriarchal figure around whom others 
chose to be buried, in the hope that this propinquity would bring dividends 
in the afterlife. 




Figure 7. 14 A copper goblet from a grave at Aali. 
183 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




Figure 7. 15 Burials were densely congregated at Sar. 



184 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 




<%. 






w 

Figure 7.16 The area at Sar, excavated by the London-Bahrain expedition. 






In the same part of the island a group of burials of children has been 
found (Fig. 7.15). 96 Since the ancients were not generally particularly 
sentimental about children, infant mortality being a common hazard, the 
presence of this group of tombs apparently reserved for children is arresting. 
Perhaps it is a tribute to Dilmun's reputation as a 'pure and clean place' in 
which disease was the exception. The apparent relative longevity of the 
Dilmunites, suggested earlier, may have been a factor in creating this 
reputation. 

Sar is the location for some of the most extensive and densely packed 
grave fields in Bahrain. In some cases it must be assumed that these are the 
resting-places of the less prosperous, those unable to afford the cost of building 
one of the large and often complex mounds. 

Now the site of a new township for the inhabitants of Bahrain, Sar is also 
the location for a remarkable late third-, early second-millennium complex 
of buildings connected by alleys and a road, situated on a ridge looking out 
across sparsely cultivated land which at this point is unusually contoured, 
close to the road which now connects Bahrain with Saudi Arabia by the King 
Fahd Causeway. The buildings were first discovered (though not apparently 
recorded) by a Jordanian team carrying out rescue archaeology in the area, 

185 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

which excavated a number of the burial mounds. The complex consists of a 
small settlement lying at the foot of the ridge, which climbs up the little wadi 
in which the buildings lie (Fig. 7.16). A road rises towards a structure which 
seems to be a temple, or other monumental building (Fig. 7.17). 

The buildings near the temple and below it seem mostly to be private 
dwellings (the first such houses to be identified in Bahrain) and are currently 
being excavated by a British team sponsored by the Institute of Archaeology. 97 

The earliest levels of the site probably correspond with City I at the Qala'at 
al-Bahrain, dating perhaps from around 2300 BC. 9X The site's principal feature 
is the 'main street' which runs from the settlement almost to the temple's 
portal. The houses are small but well constructed, generally to a common 
plan, an L-shaped room, with another, inner rectangular chamber. 

The settlement lies on the edge of a limestone outcrop in one of the most 
densely populated areas of the principal island throughout its history. It is 
within easy reach of the 'City' site at Qala'at al-Bahrain and of the temples at 
Barbar and Diraz.99 The temple lies on the highest part of the site, on an 
escarpment which looks out across the fertile plain which lies below it. 

The facade of the temple looked on to three round columns, similar to 




■ 



■* 



* ^. 






Figure 7.17 The site of Sar, early second millennium BC. The temple is in the 
centre of the complex in the foreground. 



186 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 




Figure 7.18 The temple at Sar contains some unusual architectural elements, notably 

pilasters which articulate the walls and these crescent-shaped 'altars', which recall 

strongly the 'Horns of Consecration' from a later period in Crete. They also suggest 

the very much earlier horned altars at Neolithic Catal Hiiyiik in Anatolia. 



those found at the supposed temple at Diraz which was excavated by an 
earlier British expedition (Fig. 7.10). 100 The temple itself contained further 
substantial columns, one round, one square and another square, 
subsequently covered with a circular skin of stones, thus altering it to a 
rounded shape and suggesting that square columns pre-date round ones. 101 
The temple seems to have undergone a number of rebuildings and contains 
some perplexing architectural features which, at first sight, do not seem 
to derive from any of the cultures with which Dilmun was in touch; in 
this respect, of course, they may prove to be indigenous to Bahrain. Thus, 
a number of the temple walls are articulated with pilasters, a technique 
not recorded in other Bahraini sites of the period, though evidently present 
on Failaka island. There are also several raised platforms with, at the rear 
abutting the wall, crescent-shaped structures standing proud from the 
wall to which they are attached (Fig. 7.18). These are reminiscent of the 
so-called 'horns of consecration' which are features of monumental 
buildings in second-millennium Crete, but are several hundred years earlier 
than the Cretan examples. Crescent-shaped altars are illustrated on several 
seals from the Gulf, especially from Failaka, where they seem to be 
associated with rituals at which the attendants are sometimes masked as 



187 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

bull-men (see Chapter 8). The crescent altars themselves are most 
reminiscent of the horns of the wild bull, the aurochs, which were set up 
against pillars abutting the walls of the shrines at Catal Huyuk. But these 
date from 4,000 years before the examples at Sar and so any apparent 
correspondence must surely be discounted. Burnt deposits containing 
fish vertebrae were found at the base of one of the crescent-shaped altars. 102 
The temple also produced some plaster fragments which appeared to 
have fallen from its walls. The temple at Sar, though it is somewhat rustic 
in character, is especially well preserved, with its walls standing over a 
metre high. It appears that an earlier structure lies beneath the building 
which stands above ground level (Fig. 7.19). 

Six houses have been excavated to date. A variety of domestic objects, 
including a net-sinker, weights, pounders and a wide range of Dilmun seals 
and sealings, has been recovered. Several of the houses contained plaster 
basins. One of the houses was more substantial than the others, with five 
rooms 103 and probably accommodated the town's principal inhabitant, perhaps 
connected with the temple. 

Pottery from the site is principally of the Barbar type and the excavators 
date it to around 1900 BC, the time of particular prosperity for the island. 104 
One jar, it has been suggested, may have been used for the brewing of beer. 

Sar has provided some evidence of what appears to have been a significant 
change of diet by the inhabitants. In more than one of the houses a bread 
oven was discovered in situ and comparisons with similar period material 
from Failaka and the Qala'at al-Bahrain suggests that Sar flourished at a time 
when bread was disappearing from the people's diet, to be replaced by a 
'boiled staple'. 105 

The Sar settlement has produced a substantial crop of seals and sealings, 
suggesting that the town was involved with Dilmun's international trade 
(Figs. 7.20 - 7.23). 106 The seals are similar to those recovered from Failaka 
and date to the same period, at the beginning of the second millennium. 107 
The scenes depicted on the seals are generally comparable with those 
from other sites in Bahrain and the Gulf. Two of them are particularly 
attractive: one (Fig. 7.23a) has two sets of three caprid heads on either 
side of an elongated 'chequer-board', laid out in two lines; the other (Fig. 
7.23b) has a central figure holding two ibexes, one by a horn, the other 
by the neck. 

A number of sealings or bullae has been recovered, rather more, it would 
appear, than from other Bahraini sites. These suggest that merchandise either 
sent from another destination or prepared for dispatch, was handled at Sar. 
The designs, again, show familiar motifs from the seals found on the island 
and elsewhere (Fig. 7.23c). 108 

An intriguing aspect of the Sar site is the fact that the houses of the 
settlement have all of their entrances blocked up. It is clear that this was 
done deliberately and that the site was abandoned in an orderly fashion, 

188 




a 

o 

u 

X, 

H 
d 





— 



u 
.g 

>> 

c 
o 

« 






^ 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




Figure 7.20 A Dilmun seal from Sar, of an unparalleled and very striking design. 




Figure 7.21 A Dilmun seal from Sar. 



190 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 




Figure 7.22 A Dilmun seal from Sar. 




Figure 7.23 (a), (b), (c) Sealings recovered from the houses at Sar. 

191 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




Figure 7.24 A fine chlorite circular vessel with a temple-facade design. This type 
of vessel is a characteristic product of the Gulf in the late third millennium. 





Figure 7.25 Baskets coated in bitumen have been found in eastern Arabian sites 

as well as these from Sar. 



192 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

though for what reason is not known. What is by far the finest chlorite vessel 
excavated in Bahrain has been found in one of the graves at Sar. This is circular 
in form and is lavishly decorated with carved motifs. One of these is of a 
Sumerian form, which is also found in Elam and shows the front of a temple or 
shrine, an appropriate theme to be found in the archetypal Holy Land (Fig. 
7.24). There are also examples from Sar of a most distinctive product, baskets 
coated in bitumen forming substantial but quite lightweight containers (Fig. 
7.25a). Similar bitumen baskets have been found in eastern Arabia and it may 
be remembered that Cornwall suggested that there may have been a source of 
bitumen on Bahrain in antiquity. He thought that it might have provided the 
reason for the remarkable linkage between what may have been the meaning 
of Bahrain's ancient name, composed of the Sumerian characters which were 
to be transliterated as 'NiTuk ki ', 'the oil-ship'. 

Both Sar and Medinet Hamed have produced quantities of well-made 
chlorite vessels (Fig 7.26). It does appear that this material, also known, 
more accurately, as chlorite, was one of the principal media used for the 
manufacture of containers. No doubt these were regarded as more important 
or more valuable than, for example, the bitumen baskets which have been 
recovered from several sites, here and in Arabia. 

Altogether, Sar seems likely to prove one of the most important sites in 
Bahrain. It adds another entry in the remarkable catalogue of temple 
buildings dating from this period which so evidently was the high point of 
Dilmun's ancient prosperity and importance. Near the third-millennium 
remains there is a small Hellenistic temple, indicating, as in so many other 
cases, that sites in Bahrain remained sacred over many hundred of years. 
The Hellenistic phase in the Gulf, when the successors of Alexander 
established colonies there, as well as in mainland Arabia, is well represented 
at Sar. Graves of the period suggest a prosperous Hellenized population; 
from one of the graves an engaging figure of a rider and his horse, perhaps 
a toy, was recovered (Fig 7.27). 



MEDINAT HAMED 

A quite distinctive group of mounds has been excavated at Medinat Hamed 
by the Department of Antiquities of Bahrain. The Medinat Hamed mounds 
are important in that several of them seem to be unplundered and they are, 
it would seem, particularly early. Their special interest lies in the fact that 
they are similar in construction and layout to the tombs on Umm an-Nar in 
Abu Dhabi. 109 Umm an-Nar was probably the port from which raw copper 
was exported to Dilmun for smelting and onward shipment to Sumer. There 
is also another tomb which looks as though it may have Umm an-Nar 
connections on the Budaiya road; these connections are of great importance 
in attempting to establish the likely origin of the Dilmun culture and the 

193 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




Figure 7.26 Chlorite vessels from graves at Sar; similar vessels have also been 
recovered from burials at Medinet Hamed. 




Figure 7.27 A terracotta horseman from a grave at Sar, from the Hellenistic period. 

194 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 




Figure 7.28 The burials at Al-Hajjar. 



195 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

direction from which came the civilizing influences found in the Gulf in the 
mid-third millennium. Pottery from the Medinat Hamed graves also appears 
to sustain the Umm an-Nar connection. 



AL-HAJJAR 

A further indication of the archaeological riches which seem still to lie 
everywhere in Bahrain, just below the surface, was provided in 1970 by 
two large mounds at Al-Hajjar. 110 These were originally penetrated by that 
frequent enemy and occasional friend of archaeology, the bulldozer. 
Subsequent excavation, by the Bahrain Department of Antiquities, revealed 
a complex and extensive cemetery containing burials from c. 3000 BC, the 
earliest period of the island's history, down to Hellenistic times (Fig. 7.28). 
Some of the graves were unplundered, their inhabitants still comfortably 
reposing in them; most of them had been efficiently pillaged. Many of the 
graves were rock-cut, several were compartmented and some of the early 
ones were sealed with a type of small portcullis. Several produced features 
new to the repertory of Bahrain's ancient burial practices. One third- 
millennium tomb at Al-Hajjar revealed the burial of a dog, evidently sent to 
spend the afterlife with its master (Fig. 7.29). There are also examples of 
dogs found in early graves in Sumer; in one particularly early burial of a 
boy, a dog was laid with him and thoughtfully provided with a bone to 
take with him to the afterlife. 111 

Al-Hajjar has produced a considerable quantity of high-quality artefacts 
from all the periods represented. It was the first site to yield a Dilmun seal in 
direct relationship to a burial; from its position it would appear, as might be 
expected, that the seal was worn around the neck (Fig. 7.30). 112 Another of 
the graves produced a Jemdet Nasr seal which, it has been suggested, may 
have been ancient when it was imported into Bahrain. It had probably been 
re-cut and may have been a family heirloom (Fig. 7.31)- 113 Indeed, seals of all 
periods were found at Al-Hajjar including an unusual concentration of cylinder 
seals, attesting the continuation of some degree of commercial or official 
activity in Bahrain during the otherwise relatively obscure period in the later 
second millennium. 

A baby buried in a round pot, its skull still clearly recognizable, recalled 
similar burials from the Qala'at al-Bahrain, a few miles away. One grave, 
from the Assyrian period in the eighth century, produced a fine painted 
goblet. 

From all the wide range of graves extending over a timescale of more than 
2,000 years, one of the most notable elements of the Al-Hajjar burials was 
the presence of fine steatite or chlorite vessels from all periods. The quality 
of manufacture and the consistency of design over an extended period of 
time are remarkable. 

196 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 




*A 



Figure 7.29 A dog was buried in one of the Al-Hajjar tombs, a practice known from 

Mesopotamia and Egypt. 

ON THE SANCTITY OF DILMUN 

One of the determining marks of the Dilmun civilization was that the 
principal island of Bahrain was regarded as especially and specifically 
holy; this indeed was its most enduring quality, particularly for the people 
of Mesopotamia. It was matched, of course, and to some degree offset, 
by its commercial status. However, the island's sacred character does have 
implications for the development of Dilmun's society which are as 
significant as its function as a major commercial centre. The remarkable 
concentration of temples in the northern part of the principal Bahrain 
island — Barbar (at least two) Sar, Umm es Sejour, Diraz, East and West, 
implies an extensive administration and, presumably, a priestly hierarchy 
to service them. If Dilmun's temples were to any extent associated with 
Sumer's, then it is likely that the round of temple ceremonies was frequent 
and elaborate. However, the temples of Dilmun were also quite distinctly 
Dilmunite and seem to have developed largely independently of any of 
the island's larger neighbours. 

A high degree of specialization, which was presumably associated with 
the cults which were conducted in Dilmun, is demonstrated by what was 
clearly one of its principal industries, the construction of large and substantially 
built tombs. The various types of tomb developed in Bahrain (and to a lesser 



197 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

extent on the mainland) each represent many thousands of actual examples, 
built over 600 to 800 years. This predicates a system of planning and design 
control which is truly formidable. 

The tombs themselves are considerable structures, with stone courses 
carefully laid, capstones cut and fitted and, in most cases, with ring-walls of 
well-cut stones. They are not hastily thrown up or randomly built. They 
were built to common patterns over an extensive geographical area, in eastern 
Arabia as well as in Bahrain. Oman and its coast had its own distinctive style 
of monument. 

Whilst few scholars today would argue strongly in favour of Bahrain having 
been a funerary island, a puzzling feature of the mounds is that quite a 
significant percentage of those which have been excavated appear never to 
have contained an actual burial. 114 This has produced the rather fanciful — 
but engaging — idea that the empty tombs were perhaps cenotaphs, built to 
commemorate Dilmunites who had died away from the island, perhaps in 
the course of travel on business. 

However, if, as it seems must surely have been the case, the building of 
burial mounds in Bahrain in particular was managed on an industrial basis 
then it is likely that they would have been built industrially, that is to say 



'. 




\ J ' \ " 









Figure 730 Al-Hajjar was the first site in Bahrain to produce a Dilmun seal buried 
with its owner; it would appear to have been worn around the neck. 



198 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 




m 



Figure 7.31 A stamp seal of the Jemdet Nasr period, c. 3000 BC, originating in Sumer 

and perhaps a family heirloom, was recovered from one of the Al-Hajjar graves. It 

appears to have been re-cut. 



that they were laid out in what might be called 'funerary estates', rather 
than, as a general rule, being custom-built to order, either by the deceased 
or by the bereaved. If this were the case, then it might well be that not 
all the burial mounds would be 'sold' in any one group, for whatever 
reason, but some, having been built speculatively as it were, remained 
untenanted. 

It is improbable that the two streams of Dilmun's communal life, the sacred 
represented by the temples, and the secular, the preoccupations of the 
Dilmunite economy, were ever wholly separate. Trade, in the form of an 
organized, corporately administered activity, rather than the enterprise of 
the independent merchant or entrepreneur (who seems, in any case, to have 
come later on the commercial scene), was originally, in Sumer at least, the 
province of the temples: worship of the gods and the pursuit of profitable 
enterprise were twin pillars of the Sumerian religious establishment. This 
situation, paradoxical to the present-day view (though hardly to people 
accustomed to the role of the great medieval monasteries) arose from the 
management of the temples' resources of animals, slaves and land. With the 
emergence of the lugal, however, the civil or military authority in the Sumerian 
cities began to predominate, eventually leading to the privatization of trade 
and to the rise of the independent entrepreneur. The merchant might trade 
in partnership with the temple or the secular ruler but the relationship tended 



199 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

to become more one of equals, rather than perpetuating the merchants' earlier, 
more dependent status. 

Dilmun's reputation for exceptional sanctity is one of the most enigmatic 
aspects of its history. On the face of it there is no very obvious reason why a 
small island in the Arabian Gulf should be the site of so many monumental 
temple structures and shrines, serving, apparently, a community that would 
not have exceeded a few tens of thousands of inhabitants even at the height 
of its prosperity. Dilmun's reputation as a primary religious centre which 
would seem to have ranked equally with the historic centres of Sumerian 
religion such as Kish or Nippur, may also seem to be at odds with its function 
as the hub of the Arabian Gulf's wide-ranging trade networks. 

In the third millennium in particular the principal Bahrain island must 
have seemed to its visitors a place especially favoured; the vegetation of its 
northern regions was exceptionally lush, with massive plantations of palmtrees 
spreading over much of the land and a rich growth of mangrove reaching 
down to the foreshore. The island was particularly well supplied with water 
and the marginally more benign climate which persisted in the third 
millennium would have contributed to its fertility. Seamen using the island 
in the course of their voyages from Oman to Sumer carrying supplies of 
copper and from Sumer south and east to the cities of the Indus Valley would, 
by their reports of the island's natural resources, have ensured that it was 
known as a notable exception in a region of generally inhospitable climate 
and harsh natural conditions. 

There may have been another factor involved. To take this into account it 
will be pertinent to consider for a moment one of the very few scholarly 
attempts to explore the origins of the Zodiac and the naming of the 
constellations. 115 It is curious that a phenomenon which has enjoyed so much 
exposure over the past 2,500 years as the Zodiac has had so little scientific or 
scholarly attention given to its origins or to the reasons why certain groups 
of stars were selected to represent the animals or objects which were identified 
with them. Nor is there any real study of the choice of the names given to the 
constellations, which, with barely any exceptions, have no apparent similarity 
to the animal or object with which the constellation is associated. 

The study referred to (by the late Michael Ovenden of the Department of 
Astronomy, Glasgow University) takes as its starting-point the belief that the 
choice of the constellations which were to make up the twelve 'houses' of 
the Zodiac shows that it was first made in the early part of the third millennium 
BC. As this was a time of rapid and exceptional advances all over the ancient 
world, this is an entirely acceptable time to propose. The observation of the 
night sky, a preoccupation of the people of Sumer and destined to become 
one of the triumphs of Babylonian science, had already moved to a level of 
careful and sophisticated calculation. 

The identification of the major constellations would have been 
undertaken particularly as an aid to navigation, another wholly reasonable 

200 



BAHRAIN: THE BLESSED ISLAND 

assumption. At this time seamen were beginning their first long-distance 
voyages in search of raw materials and trade; navigation became a 
necessary science for the success of their enterprises and, indeed, for 
their very survival. The observations would need to be taken from an 
island, with a central mountain and with other islands nearby on the 
horizon to act as fiducial marks. 116 

It is proposed that a northern latitude must be sought for the first naming 
of the constellations, as their order on the ecliptic would seem to require a 
point of observation around the middle 30s of latitude. It recognizes that 
only a people with a highly developed maritime tradition, powered by 
commercial necessity, would be likely to undertake so elaborate and 
complex a procedure as the identification and naming of the constellations 
to serve their purposes. The study suggests that the Cretans were the most 
probable contenders, pointing to their prowess as seamen and the long- 
ranging voyages which they undertook. The Babylonians are rather 
summarily dismissed (whilst admitting that the credit is often given to them 
for the Zodiac's invention), on the grounds that 'their seafaring would have 
been in the Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean, too far south for the latitude of 
the constellations' observers'. 117 

The study is, however, flawed in two particulars. First, there is no evidence 
that the Cretans were 'great sailors, and undoubtedly therefore, great traders' 
in the early or mid-third millennium. At that time the island's people were 
still effectively in a Neolithic stage of culture; it was not until the very end of 
the third millennium and the beginning of the second that the 'classic' Minoan 
culture began to emerge in Crete, long after the Sumerians and their successors 
had taken to the ocean and to the planning of far-ranging voyages. 

Second, the Babylonians, in this respect as in so many others, were the 
heirs of the Sumerians, whose phenomenal abilities affected the course of 
societal development so profoundly. It is clear that the Sumerians observed 
the constellations and recorded their observations though these have not 
survived in the same quantity as is the case with Babylonian star lists. 

The contention that the Gulf is too far south for the constellations chosen, 
which fall along the line of ecliptic early in the third millennium, is also 
insupportable. The constellations are clearly visible from the Gulf and from 
the cities of southern Mesopotamia. 118 

It has for long been suggested that the Sumerians and their successors 
used the ziggurats, the high temple buildings that they constructed in the 
later part of the third millennium, and which dominated all the important 
cities, for astronomical observation. Akkadian records show that the 
movements of the constellations were observed and charted; there is ample, 
if largely inferential evidence, that they had access to records set down by 
their Sumerian predecessors in the early third millennium. 119 

The Sumerians divided the sky into three 'ways' or bands. 120 These were 
the Way of Anu which represented the celestial equator. The Way of Enlil ran 

201 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

to the north of it whilst, significantly, to the south lay the Way of Enki. It is 
clear that the Mesopotamians were fully aware of the principal regions of the 
sky and recorded them with careful observation; it is certainly pertinent that 
the southern sky was associated with Enki, who was the most important 
divinity connected with the Gulf. 

The great towers which are so notable a feature of the Gulf's architecture 
in the late third and early second millennia may have served a purpose 
similar to that of the temple platforms on which the priests of Sumer, Akkad 
and Babylonia made their observations. Given the enthusiasm which the 
peoples of Western Asia in antiquity demonstrated for astronomical 
observations, it could hardly be otherwise. 

On the criteria that Ovenden proposed, a date early in third millennium, 
a people with highly developed maritime skills and a wide-ranging trade, 
and an island with a central prominence from which observations might be 
taken, attended by other islands on the horizon, the Gulf becomes a much 
more likely theatre for the observations required and the principal Bahrain 
island a much more likely candidate for the locus of observation than Crete. 
Bahrain has its central prominence, the Jebel Dukhan, and, as part of an 
archipelago, is well provided with attendant islands. 

There is, of course, not a whit of evidence at this stage to support this 
speculation. However, the study's astronomical arguments about the likely 
role of islands in the naming of the Zodiacal constellations is compelling and 
if Crete must, on chronological, archaeological and historical grounds, be 
discarded, Bahrain is a very reasonable, indeed altogether more likely, 
alternative. 

If Bahrain-Dilmun had served as the site for this very important 
development, both in the maritime affairs of the Sumerians and in the more 
mystical overlay which such knowledge would certainly have been given, 
having regard to the management of scientific knowledge in ancient societies, 
it would account for the very special regard in which Dilmun was held over 
so many centuries. As the constellations were always identified with the 
great gods, the island could truly be said to be their original home. It would 
also be, in a transcendental sense which would have been devised by the 
priests who would no doubt have been responsible for the original 
observations, a place of wonder and mystery, the linchpin of the cosmos 
and the binding-post between earth and heaven. 

Note: The epigraphy of the name 'Dilmun' (p. 147) is from Robert Englund 'Dilmun in 
the Archaic Urk Corpus' in Dilmun: New Studies in the Archaeology and Early History 
of Bahrain (1983), ed. Daniel P.Potts, Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag. 



202 



8 

DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING 
LANDS 



The society which evolved in the Gulf in the second half of the third 
millennium BC and which survived into the early centuries of the second 
was highly sophisticated and complex. Whilst it clearly possessed many of 
the characteristics of its great contemporaries, such as the riverine cultures of 
Egypt and Mesopotamia, a highly structured society, monumental public 
buildings, far-ranging contacts, extensive and rich burial fields, it was distinct 
in many of its attributes. For this there were two basic reasons: the particularly 
mercantile nature of the society, and the fact that it was sea-based with a 
considerable, and virtually unparalleled, reliance upon islands as its main 
centres of population and activity. 

Dilmun's absorption with international trade makes it quite different from 
other developed, early urban civilization. Many of these, of course, were 
concerned with exchange mechanisms and with the onward movement of 
raw materials or manufactured goods; in all cases the civilizations, centred 
on cities or royal courts, themselves absorbed substantial quantities of the 
goods which were the subject of the systems of exchange, which powered 
their distribution and acquisition. Often this absorption of the society's 
products found its natural outlet in the large and stately funerary monuments 
which, from the third millennium onwards, characterized many such societies 
in the Near East. 

In Dilmun's case, trade was the very basis of the society, with one important 
reservation, which will be considered further. By the time that the epicentre 
of Dilmun had shifted to the Bahrain islands from eastern Arabia, which 
seems to have happened some time after the middle of the third millennium, 
trade was clearly the whole basis of the economy: agriculture and fishing, 
though present, were relatively unimportant. 

Most ancient societies relied on agriculture for their prosperity and for the 
development of their social systems. Not so in Dilmun's case: as a sea-based 
economy agriculture was of relatively little importance (other than the 
harvesting of the sea, though the extent to which this figured in the people's 
lives is not certain). The extremes of climate did not permit the development 
of cereal agronomy, though the date-palm, at least in the case of the great 

203 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

oasis of Hofuf in eastern Arabia, was the exception to this principle, for 
Dilmun's dates were famous. 

Dilmun is the only example in the Old World of an island-based society, 
one, moreover which depended only on four principal components — Failaka, 
Tarut, Bahrain and, with qualifications, Umm an-Nar. It is this factor which 
contributes much of Dilmun's special character and marks out its differences 
from its immediate neighbours and contemporaries. The civilization of south- 
western Iran was land-based; Sumer to the north depended on the rivers and 
lagoons for much of its internal communications. The Indus Valley cities, so 
far as anything is really known of them, were independent elements in a 
society linked by the rivers and the valley systems in which the cities grew; 
only Dilmun was a maritime society, looking to the sea for its communications 
and interconnections. As its prosperity grew and as the demand for its principal 
product, copper, expanded, important settlements were established along 
the southern coast of the Gulf, providing access to, and export from, the 
copper mines of northern Oman. 

By the time that the Gulf begins to come to prominence, c. 2400 BC, the 
polities of the Sumerian cities had been flourishing for upwards of a thousand 
years. The Gulf — the Dilmun culture or, as it might now be seen to be, the 
Dilmun state — was, in the early days, the heir of all the complexity of Sumerian 
civilization. When the second city settlement was established the Qala'at al- 
Bahrain and the first great temples were built at Barbar, the merchant 
community was already vigorous and widely travelled. Colonies of merchants 
were maintained, probably over several generations, often far distant from 
the home base. 

The Sumerians and their Akkadian and Babylonian successors were diligent 
archivists. Vast quantities of business documents have been recorded as well 
as libraries of literary material. One of the key archives of the trade with 
Dilmun was the cache of tablets in Ea-Nasir's house at Ur, 1 which will be 
referred to in Chapter 9- It is disappointing that so few inscribed tablets have 
been recovered from Gulf sites, particularly from Bahrain which, as the 
operational centre of the trade for so long, must have employed extensive 
and complex filing systems and records. The early Mesopotamians were 
great ones for making lists and for producing concordances of terms used in 
different languages. To find such a reference relating to the Dilmun trade 
would probably reveal what language the merchants, and doubtless the 
community as a whole, spoke and wrote. 

It is, of course, possible that, unlike the Mesopotamians who made use of 
the almost indestructible properties of baked clay tablets, their Dilmunite 
counterparts may have used more perishable materials on which to make 
their records. The date-palm is ubiquitous throughout eastern Arabia and is 
indigenous to it. Experiments have been conducted to fabricate a writing 
material from palm leaves, using a process analogous to that employed to 
make papyrus in Egypt. Such a material was known in early Islamic times; it 

204 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

is therefore entirely possible that it was known in antiquity, for, given the 
natural inventiveness of the people of the Gulf and their general tendency to 
make the maximum use of what relatively few raw materials a niggardly 
providence had given them, it is altogether likely that they would have come 
upon this application of their most familiar source of fibrous material; after 
all, they used palm fibres to make ropes. 

In this event, given the extreme summer humidity of the Gulf, records 
written on palm 'papyrus' would not survive long; indeed, given the intensely 
pragmatic attitude of the people of the Gulf to the business of living, it would 
perhaps be surprising if they had persisted with the use of such material, 
rather than adopting baked clay. Be that as it may, there is a dearth of inscribed 
tablets throughout the Gulf; this may be the happenstance of archaeology or 
it may be that the absence of written records is the result of their decay. A 
palm-fibre 'papyrus' would leave no discernible trace in a grave or habitation 
site when, even if any remains were present, they would simply have been 
dismissed as matting or an accidental incursion. 

If the palm did provide this service to the ancient people of the Gulf — an 
entirely speculative suggestion — then it might well be another reason for the 
divinity particularly associated with Dilmun, Enshaq-Inzak, to be identified 
with a palm branch. By what is no doubt nothing more than coincidence, 
this god was identified with the planet Mercury, which has often been linked 
with gods of writing, of learning generally and of commerce. 

The movement of goods up and down the Gulf and their eventual 
distribution to distant markets, the maintenance of proper records and the 
accounting procedures which were evidently so much a preoccupation for 
the people, all of these would have required a high degree of organization 
and of specialization. From the times of the earliest extant records relating to 
Dilmun we hear of a tax-collector, a post suggesting already a high degree of 
bureaucracy. 

Thus it is that there is a third Dilmun, to be added to the paradisial Dilmun 
of myth and the mercantile Dilmun of commodities and trade. This third 
Dilmun is really an extension of the Dilmun of ships and sailors, of merchants 
harvesting their profits from the city on Bahrain's northern shores. This is the 
temporal Dilmun, the political organism whose dominion from time to time 
extended along the east Arabian shore as far as the Bay of Kuwait and included 
the islands which lie close to the point where the two great rivers of Iraq end 
their journey in the headwaters of the Gulf. 

In the present state of knowledge and at this distance in time it is not 
possible to speculate meaningfully on what sort of political organization 
constituted the Dilmunite state in the third and early second millennia when 
it was at its most important. We know that Ur-Nanshe of Lagash claimed to 
receive tribute from Dilmun in the twenty-sixth century BC. 2 This implies 
that even at that time Dilmun was a state, though standing in the status of 
client to one of the principal Sumerian powers, if Ur-Nanshe is to be believed. 

205 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Some 200 years later Sargon would seem to have captured Dilmun and added 
it to his newly founded empire. Other kings after him claimed sovereignty 
over the Holy Land. We know the names of several of Dilmun's (or, more 
strictly, Tilmun's) later kings: Uperi, who lived 'like a fish in the midst of the 
sea', Hundaru and Qanaia, to mention three. Throughout this long period 
Dilmun as a political entity seems to have extended and contracted, sometimes 
being confined in extent to the Bahrain islands, at others embracing the 
whole coast to the west and north. It is not without point, bearing in mind 
the extraordinarily long currency of names in Arabia, that the Hasa province 
of Arabia has from time to time been known as Bahrain, though this did not 
imply any political control over the mainland by the islanders. In his report 
to the Viceroy's Foreign Department in 1879, Durand reproduces a map 
from a somewhat earlier date which shows 'El-Bahrein' as embracing the 
Qatar peninsula as well as the whole of eastern Arabia. 3 

As far as we know Dilmun never incorporated Qatar within its boundaries. 
There are reports of the remains of settlements on Qatar which include Barbar 
material but they are scanty and do not seem to represent any major evidence 
of permanent or long-lasting habitation. 4 More likely they are the result of 
short-stay expeditions to what, even in antiquity, must have been a pretty 
inhospitable shore. 

It is the mainland which extends from due west of Bahrain up to the 
edge of the marshlands of southern Iraq which was originally associated 
with the larger concept of 'Dilmun'. Thus insular Dilmun was able to 
sustain its territorial links with Sumer, far to the north both by sea and by 
land. If the Sumerians did come to what was to become their homeland 
from the south, then this identification of the mainland coastal regions 
with Dilmun may have served to perpetuate the route of their migration 
in their collective memory. It may have been because of this migration 
that they were disposed to retain the ancient name of the mainland region 
in their new home in the islands, when they moved the centre of Dilmun 
there in the latter part of the third millennium. We know the Sumerians, 
on the evidence of some of their far distant settlements in northern Syria, 
for example, were capable of seeding and sustaining colonies which were 
essentially Sumerian in character, established in an alien environment far 
removed from the homeland. It could be that this is how Dilmun began 
and was then sustained by its landward connection to the north with 
Sumer, as much as by the sea. The difference is that the Syrian settlements 
were heavily fortified whilst City I at Bahrain was not. In this connection 
it has been suggested that the Sumerians turned to the Gulf and southwards 
in search of trade only after they were driven out of their northern outposts, 
particularly the settlement which they had established in Anatolia. The 
evidence, at present, is obscure. 



206 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 



FAILAKA ISLAND 



It is on the basis of the partial excavation of the early second-millennium 
settlements on Failaka island, the great caches of Dilmun seals found there, 
the occasional inscription and the plentiful pottery recovered from the sites, 
that the links between Dilmun and Failaka have been established. Parts of 
the Epic of Gilgamesh may be set in and around the Gulf shores and in 
Dilmun; in that story the presence of Siduri, a goddess, is important, for she 
lives in an island on the edge of the ocean which is known as the Garden of 
the Sun. 5 Gilgamesh visits her at the beginning of his quest. She was, in 
Sumerian times, the tutelary goddess of the Gulf, who resided in her garden 
and dispensed drinks to travellers, particularly those who were about to 
cross the waters of death from which, unlike Gilgamesh, they would not 
return. It seems most probable that Failaka was Siduri's island, as Burrows 
indeed proposed. 6 If this were so it would account for the sanctuary on the 
island and for its reputation as a place sacred to the goddess, under whatever 
name — a reputation so long enjoyed. 

The garden of which Siduri was the mistress was said to bear trees laden 
with jewels. It has been suggested that this is a reference to the frequently 
intense phosphorescence of the Gulf's waters, caused by the coral in the 
shallows. If Failaka is Siduri's island, Siduri is also to be identified with Artemis, 
to whom Failaka, under its name of Ikaros, was consecrated. 

A pretty little Greek temple on Failaka has been excavated by the Danes 
(Fig. 8.1). 7 This, it must be presumed, was connected with the oracle for 
which, in Greek times, the island seems also to have been celebrated. The 
oracle, however, might be less permanent in its structure, a sacred grove 
perhaps or some wise woman lurking in a cave. 

Cornwall, who seems not to have known of the identification between 
Failaka and Ikaros when he prepared his thesis, recorded Strabo's and Arrian's 
description of an oracle, said to be dedicated to Diana Tauropolis, situated 
in Ikaros. 8 He suggests that the oracle's name meant something like 'Diana, 
of the City of the Bulls': but of what city, what bulls? In fact, Cornwall is 
incorrect in transcribing the epithet as 'Tauropolis'; it is 'Tauropolos' which is 
a very different matter. In this form it could mean 'Hunter of Bulls', a very 
appropriate soubriquet for the Chaste Goddess. 

Diana is the Roman form of the Greek Artemis, whom Alexander named 
as the guardian goddess of Failaka and to whom its animals were sacred. 
The island in the Aegean after which he is said to have named the Gulf 
island is Ichara, not Ikaros; but it too had a high bull cult, of the sort which, 
it increasingly appears, was prevalent on Failaka. Thus it would appear that 
Alexander, recognizing the sacred character of the Gulf island and its bull 
cults, which by the evidence of the seals were ceremonies of immense 
antiquity, brought all these elements together and identified Failaka with 
Ichara, because of their common preoccupation with rituals involving bulls. 9 

207 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




Figure 8.1 Failaka was an important settlement in Hellenistic times, with a Greek 
community which supported its own temples and shrines and at least one gymnasium. 



A most intriguing explanation for the adoption of the name Ikaros for the 
island has, however, been offered. This suggest that the Greeks knew that in 
Assyrian times there was a temple on the island called e-kara; w it was named 
thus in Aramaic sources also. 

The Greeks had a boundless capacity for the distortion of foreign 
placenames, only to be rivalled by a similar propensity of the British in 
modern times. Their mangling of such Egyptian expressions as Hikuptah, 
the name of the principal temple in Memphis produced Aigyptos and, hence, 
Egypt. Memphis itself was originally Men-Nefer, one of the ancient names of 
the capital city. 

So it may have been with e-kara, located on the island in the northern 
reaches of the Gulf." This would have sounded to a Greek as indistinguishable 
from Ichara, and the presence of bull cults on both islands would have made 
their identification very natural. Ikaros was, presumably, a later adaptation 
of the name, the reasons for which remains obscure though the association 
with the Daedalus myth set in Crete which culminated in the death of Ikaros, 
may have had something to do with it. 

The ascription of the temple on Failaka island as e-kara is based on a 
bronze bowl inscribed in Akkadian referring to the temple, which is also 



208 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

known from a neo-Assyrian list of Dilmunite temples. 12 The e-kara was, 
according to the Akkadian inscription, dedicated to Shamash, the sun-god 
who played an important part in the Epic of Gilgamesh and who, it will be 
seen in Chapter 10, comforts the dying Enkidu. 

It is difficult to suggest what might have been the nature of the oracle on 
Failaka. However, it is not impossible that the ancient goddess who was 
identified with the island was Siduri herself, who, according to the Epic of 
Gilgamesh, lived on the Edge of the Ocean in the Garden of the Sun. Her 
later identification with the Erythraean Sibyl brings her into association with 
a very visionary and prophetic creature indeed. Perhaps this linking of the 
island celebrated for its bull cults with a goddess of ancient prophecy accounts, 
in Alexander's time, for its reputation as the site of an oracle of Diana and the 
bulls. 

Failaka appears only to have become habitable relatively late in the day, 
at the very end of the third millennium or at the beginning of the second. 13 
Prior to this time the island was unstable and, as the level of the Gulf was 
more than a metre higher than it is today, much of it was under water. 14 The 
probability is that the island, when it became capable of sustaining a permanent 
population, was colonized by Dilmunites from Bahrain and eastern Arabia. 
The island, like its larger sister, was evidently sacred, for cult buildings have 
been excavated and the island's reputation in the days of Alexander the 
Great testify to an enduring and special sanctity. 

The remarkable concentration of Gulf seals on Failaka will be described 
in Chapter 9. It is difficult to account for them in such quantity, in the absence 
of any settlement of the scale of, for example, those known from Bahrain. 
Thus far, some 500 have been recovered from Failaka, 1 ' approximately the 
same number as the much larger and more important Bahrain island. 

Two of the seals from Failaka are important, not so much for their aesthetic 
interest but rather for the hints which they give of wider horizons to the Gulf 
merchants and the trade which they conducted at the beginning of the second 
millennium BC. 16 These two seals have conventional Egyptian scarab backs, 
of the style which was then just becoming popular in the Nile Valley; previously 
the Egyptians had tended to favour round stamp seals. At the end of the third 
millennium, however, they began to adopt the scaraboid seal which, whilst 
it was still a stamp, became oval in shape; eventually Egyptian scarabs became 
one of the most familiar products of the Egyptian Kingdom, with an extensive 
repertory of designs of their own. The examples from Failaka, however, 
though they are Egyptian in the scaraboid form, have Gulf seal designs on 
their obverse (Fig. 8.2a). This is very remarkable. It suggests either Egyptian 
traders established in Failaka, since, if they were merely itinerant they would 
surely have seals which were wholly Egyptian to mark their merchandise, or 
Dilmunite traders exporting to Egypt and paying their customers the 
compliment of adopting a degree of Egyptian practice in the manner of the 
seals which they used. 17 

209 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 





ire 8.2(a) Two of the many stamp seals recovered from Failaka look very like 
Egyptian scarabs. At the time that they were made, this most Egyptian form of seal 
was just coming into general use in the Nile Valley. 



Egyptian (or Egyptianized) sealings have also been recovered from tombs 
in the Dhahran area. Their datings are uncertain, though some seem certainly 
to be more likely to be placed in the first rather than the second millennium. 

It may be that the evident contact between the headlands of the Gulf and 
the Nile Valley, which were an important part of the formative process of the 
Early Dynastic period in Egypt, continued thereafter. How frequently these 
contacts were made and how they were effected are as yet matters of 
speculation but the evidence of some form of association in the period which 
embraces the Middle Kingdom to the Late Period deserves further research. 



210 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 




Figure 8.2 (b) A group of seals from Failaka island; early second millennium BC. 



211 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

A series of occupation levels has been identified on Failaka, spanning the 
period from 2000 BC to around 1200 BC; included in this sequence are 
Kassite levels. 18 There is also evidence of temple building in the Hellenistic 
period, in addition to the monumental inscriptions which were noted earlier. 19 

Failaka is unusual in the Gulf for having yielded a crop of cuneiform 
inscriptions. These include inscribed seals, pottery, sherds and some tablets. 
Several relate to divinities of the Gulf, including Inzak; it is possible that a 
temple to Inzak existed on the island. The inscriptions tend to be very brief 
but that they are present in greater quantity than anywhere else in the Gulf 
is perhaps the consequence of the island's proximity to southern Iraq. It is 
notable that there do not appear to be any of the burial-mound fields on 
Failaka, which are so marked a characteristic of the landscapes both of eastern 
Arabia and Bahrain. 

After the Danes' first seasons' work on the sites on Failaka island, there 
was only occasional and spasmodic activity in the intervening years until the 
French began operations on the island in the early 1980s. 20 However, the 
results have been important in adding to the understanding of the sort of 
role which Failaka played in the Gulf at the beginning of the second 
millennium BC and, again, in Hellenistic times. 

One intriguing discovery made by the French, who have been working 
extensively on Failaka in recent years, on the south-west corner of the 
island, was the foundations of what they decided was a high tower which 
would have been visible, like a pharos, from a far distance to seamen as 
they approached the island. 21 Whether the tower was intended to serve 
as a marker for the seamen or whether it was defensive for the islanders 
is not yet known. However, it is striking that a tower, built on Failaka for 
whatever purpose, should join the list of other towers in the Gulf: the 
tower tombs at Aali in Bahrain and the defensive towers, probably the 
earliest examples of the form, which were built near the copper-mines in 
northern Oman. 

The Failaka tower had thick walls and a substantial base, with buttresses, 
all suggesting that the original structure was of considerable height. Later, 
another temple was found on Failaka which the excavators believed might 
be dedicated to Inzak, as recorded in cuneiform inscriptions. 22 

A survey of the Kuwaiti mainland was conducted in the late 1980s. The 
shoreline was known to have sunk considerably over the past 4,000 years, 
so it was not expected that extensive early remains would be found. 23 Some 
Bronze Age pottery sherds were found, however; it is likely that Kuwait 
would have been occupied at the time of Dilmun's prosperity but any 
settlement that there might have been must now be lost beneath the silt and 
the coastal waters. 

The Danish expeditions on Failaka had early on identified the island's 
importance and the rather equivocal role it seems to have discharged in the 
history of the Gulf at the beginning of the second millennium BC, the time 

212 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

when it was probably first colonized. The Danes found a building that they 
termed a 'palace', 24 the first phase of which was contemporary with the second 
temple level at Barbar and with the second city at Qala'at al-Bahrain. It was 
a substantial building, almost square, measuring 22x23 metres. It contained 
pillars and walls with pilasters, architectural features which were to be found 
in the temple at Sar, on Bahrain. It seems likely that the population of Failaka 
abandoned the island precipitantly in the Old Babylonian period, for the 
houses, built to a regular plan like those at Sar, showed evidence of being 
left hurriedly. 25 

A second 'palace' was built at Failaka around 1400 BC, by which time the 
Kassites had been long established in Mesopotamia as in the Gulf. 26 A third 
'palace' was built, probably around 700 years later, if an inscription found 
near the remains which declared 'This palace belongs to Nebuchadnezzar, 
King of Babylon' is to be believed. 27 

Failaka enjoyed another period of prosperity in the time following the 
death of Alexander the Great, when the Seleucids who succeeded to the 
eastern parts of Alexander's empire established their presence in the Gulf. 
Like Bahrain, Failaka also had hoards of Antiochid coins, one found in I960, 
the second the following year. 28 The Seleucid King Antiochos III is 
commemorated on one of the coins: he reigned from 223 to 187 BC. One of 
his predecessors was Seleukos II Kallinikos, to whom reference is made in 
the inscription ordered to be set up on Failaka to record Alexander's special 
favour to the island. 29 

There is a recent translation of the text of the inscription, which is cut 
in Greek characters, though now much damaged. 30 It was intended to 
be set up in a sacred enclosure established on Failaka in the aftermath 
of Alexander's withdrawal from the east, before his early death in Babylon 
in 323 BC. The inscription itself dates from approximately a century 
after Alexander's death. It refers to the 'transfer of the sanctuary of Soteira' 
which, as we know, was one of the epithets attached to Artemis. It 
mentions the ordering of a gymnastic contest in honour of the gods; the 
remains of what may have been the gymnasium of Failaka have been 
excavated on the island, suggesting that there must have been a sizeable 
Greek population there to provide enough boys and young men to 
require the services of such an institution, so familiar in all Greek towns. 
The King's orders refer to the protection of the rights of the inhabitants: 
'everybody shall pay regard to the interests of the community', 'Personal 
safety and exemption from taxes shall be guaranteed' and, most 
interestingly, the exemption from taxes is extended to 'those trading 
with the island and with destinations beyond it'. 31 The remains of the 
typically Hellenistic temple which has been excavated on Failaka island 
and the inscriptions and other evidence of the time, indicate the 
extraordinary ability of the Greeks to flourish in even the most remote 
and inhospitable circumstances. 

213 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

EASTERN SAUDI ARABIA 

Further down the coast, in what is now the territory of the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia, the situation is markedly different from the apparent archaeological 
barrenness of the Kuwaiti coastal region. Intensive survey of the surface 
sites in the eastern region, as in the other parts of the Kingdom, over very 
recent years has revealed much already and promises more in the years to 
come. 

Unlike other parts of Arabia there appears to be no evidence of human 
occupation in the eastern quadrant until Neolithic times: 32 what were thought 
to be Palaeolithic (even 'Neanderthal') facies have now been shown to all 
come from New Stone Age times. 33 The Palaeolithic is generally well 
represented in Arabia as a whole, outside the eastern region. In the Najd, the 
central region, in which lies Riyadh the capital of the Kingdom, extensive 
Palaeolithic evidence has been recovered, yet there is so far nothing from 
the east. Indeed, a line can be drawn down the face of the peninsula, somewhat 
to the east of the city of Riyadh, from the north to the south, which marks the 
limit of the Arabian Palaeolithic. The explanation can only be that in 
Palaeolithic times the level of the Gulf was substantially higher and that the 
east was under water (see Chapter 2). When, in the period between 17,000 
BC and 9000 BC, the waters withdrew, leaving the Gulf itself largely uncovered, 
it is probable that any humans that inhabited the region would have stayed 
near to the ancient course of the Tigris and Euphrates which then debouched 
into the Gulf and ran into the sands at the Straits of Hormuz. Such material 
evidence as they would have left behind them would therefore now lie 
fathoms deep beneath the Gulf's waters. 

Many of the Neolithic tools, the blades for example, the pink tools from 
Khor in Qatar, the many excellently shaped arrowheads and leaf-shaped 
artefacts, are distinctive and memorable, suggesting that when Neolithic 
craftsmen established themselves they were already possessed of a secure 
industrial tradition. But it is with the first appearance of pottery in the region 
that the interconnections between the mainland and the islands may properly 
be said to begin. Much of the prosperity of eastern Arabia, in ancient times as 
now, depends upon the great Al Hasa oasis and it is from the region peripheral 
to the oasis that the earliest evidence of settlement comes. 

Before modern development the cultivated area of Al Hasa covered about 
8,000 hectares, but now the land available for cultivation has been increased 
to about 20,000 hectares. 34 This, together with its two large towns and over 
fifty other settlements, makes Al Hasa the largest oasis in Arabia; indeed, it is 
one of the largest in the world. 

The enormous size of this farming area is made possible by an immense 
volume of water issuing from subterranean rock strata as springs. Each of the 
four main springs in the oasis has a flow rate in excess of 100,000 litres per 
minute. 35 Because this water is available — and there appears to have been 

214 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

more in antiquity — the oasis of Al Hasa has a history of continuous human 
settlement going back to Neolithic times. It is not known when an organized 
system of irrigation first appeared, but it seems that one was in operation at 
least by early Islamic times. 

The water of eastern Arabia today comes principally from springs in the 
oases of Al Hasa, al-Qatif and Bahrain. This water is held under pressure in 
the rock strata of the Alat, Khubar and Umm al-Radhuma formations, whose 
waters come to the surface in the oases of eastern Arabia, through cracks and 
faults in the rock. In the springs of Al Hasa, the water is warm (between 29° 
and 39°C). Carbon-14 analyses of the water show it to be between 24,000 
and 30,000 years since it fell as rain. The water belongs to an earlier wet 
period. 36 

During the Neolithic period, about 7,000 years before the present, an 
entirely new factor entered the history of the Gulf. It is a factor of crucial 
importance and it has caused a recurrence of the old controversy about the 
origin of the Sumerians. The evidence in question was the recognition 
(originally by two archaeological enthusiasts from ARAMCO, the oil company 
whose headquarters is in the eastern region) of sherds of pottery which 
could be classified as belonging to the Ubaid culture of southern Iraq, the 
first such culture to be established in the land which was, several hundred 
years later, to become Sumer. 37 

Ubaid pottery, a highly distinctive ware which, once it has been seen, 
is virtually impossible to mistake for any other, has a rich repertory of 
elegant, predominantly geometric patterns. It has now been identified 
on a number of sites in the northern reaches of the eastern Arabian coast, 
in Qatar, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates; more sites are probably 
now lost, submerged as a consequence of the changes which have occurred 
in the Gulf's sea-levels since Ubaid times. Some forty Ubaid sites have 
been identified in eastern Arabia clustering around Ain Qannas and Abu 
Khamis. 38 

From Neolithic times onwards the situation in eastern Arabia reveals 
evidence of communities, long-distance contact and a growing prosperity. 
Many of the settlements had domesticated animals but are clearly Neolithic, 
stone-tool makers and hunter-gatherers. 39 The people who formed these 
communities are the earliest pottery-users known in Arabia; they are 
contemporary with the Ubaid period in Iraq. At least thirty sites have been 
identified which have produced evidence of Ubaid pottery. Already these 
people were maintaining contact with far-distant regions, from which, by 
the very earliest manifestation of the region's concern with trade, they imported 
such natural products as galena, diorite, obsidian, haematite, red ochre and 
bitumen. 

Three important sites in eastern Saudi Arabia from this period have been 
excavated by the Department of Antiquities. These are Ain Qannas, Al- 
Dawsariyya and Abu Khamis. 40 At Ain Qannas the remains of an enclosure 

215 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

and the evidence of the domestication of cattle were recovered. The site 
revealed a succession of minor fluctuations in climate which determined the 
flow of an extinct spring found at the bottom of the excavation, which was 
no doubt the reason for the choice of the site for settlement in the first 
place. 41 

Ubaid pottery in Mesopotamia falls into four categories, the first two named 
after the southern Iraqi sites where they were first identified. 

Ubaid 1, Eridu, c. 5300-5100 BC 
Ubaid 2, Hajji Muhammad, c. 5100-4300 BC 
Ubaid 3, Standard, c. 4300-3900 BC 
Ubaid 4, Late, c. 3900-3500 BC 

Ubaid pottery on Arabian sites belongs to the Ubaid 3 and 4 types except 
at Ain Qannas, where it appears to be Hajji Muhammad (Ubaid 2). Analysis 
has shown that the Ubaid pottery is of southern Mesopotamian origin, and 
therefore reached eastern Arabia by exchange or trade. 

Other pottery too is found on Arabian settled Neolithic period sites: chaff- 
tempered, hand-made and red in exterior colour, it was perhaps a locally 
made imitation ware. A range of flint tools was comparable with those of the 
early Arabian Neolithic blade cultures. 

On the other sites (as in Bahrain and Qatar, further to the south) the 
pottery is Ubaid 3 and 4. 42 The pottery was originally carried down to Arabia 
from southern Iraq, particularly from the city of Ur where much of it was 
fabricated. Amongst the stone tools are fine tanged and barbed arrowheads 
and flat, tabular flint scrapers. 43 

The site at Al-Dawsariyya also yielded Ubaid pottery. Most notable was 
the evidence of reed dwellings or enclosures, provided by the many pieces 
of reed-impressed lime plaster. 44 Traces of red paint were also found, 
suggesting that the interiors of the dwellings enjoyed some form of 
decoration. The presence of corner pieces suggests that the 'houses' were 
rectangular. Al-Dawsariyya maintained long-distance contacts, as witnessed 
by blades made of obsidian which originates in Anatolia, stone beads, 
greenstone axes and other ornamental objects, witnesses both to the 
development of trade and to the appearance — in all probability — of an 
aesthetic sense amongst the inhabitants. From this site, too, have come 
small stone borers which could have been used to pierce shell or, 
conceivably, pearls. 45 Altogether there are seven distinct levels of occupations 
at Al-Dawsariyya. 

Many of the eastern Arabian Ubaid sites are small coastal settlements, 
probably concerned with fishing, some of which appear to have been 
occupied over quite extended periods. The pottery, which incidentally is 
invariably discovered in association with late Neolithic stone tools, is mostly 
relatively late Ubaid. One more or less complete pot from Khursaniyah shows 

216 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

that it was made on a slow wheel. Spectrographic analysis has produced the 
interesting conclusion that all of it was made near Ur. 46 

The presence of Ubaid pottery on eastern Arabian sites is probably 
evidence of contact, however indirectly, between the makers of the pottery 
in Ur and small populations of semi-nomads who set up camp seasonally 
to fish; it is also a testimony to the distances over which pottery might be 
traded, even in this very early time. It may also be that fishermen from 
the early Sumerian cities came down to the Gulf in search of seawater 
catches. The Gulfs waters have for long been exploited; the coastal sites 
have yielded, from a somewhat later date than the Ubaid sites, evidence 
of what was most likely to have been the harvesting of the pearl beds. 
Most pertinent here was the discovery of tiny awls and borers associated 
with fragments of mother-of-pearl which suggested that even 5,000 years 
and more ago the pearl was being adapted for ornament. Spindlewhorls, 
from the same levels, indicate that some form of fabric-making was 
practised. 47 

The excavation of the Ain Qannas Ubaid-period settlement produced 
much original and important evidence. 48 Not the least of it was the 
analysis of spring sediments which showed that during the period 5000- 
3000 BC the eastern Arabian climate was, from time to time, moister 
than today. 

The large site of Al-Dawsariyya lies 1.5 km from the present-day 
coastline. 49 Surface finds were abundant, dating both to around 4200 BC 
and to the Uruk period after 3500 BC. The lowest layer gave a Carbon-14 
date of c. 4950 BC. The site is later than Ain Qannas, with the earlier levels 
overlapping. The surface of the important subsidiary site of al-Khursaniyya 
gave a date of 4200 BC. 50 

Al-Dawsariyya yielded large quantities of Ubaid pottery, mixed with 
Neolithic flint debris. It was larger than might have been expected of a site 
with only infrequent occupation. There were hints of a more complex range 
of trading contacts and exchanges, not at all typical of small, occasional 
fishing communities. There were obsidian blades, probably from Anatolia; 
and semi-precious stone beads, greenstone axes and other ornamental objects 
suggest a somewhat richer inventory than might reasonably have been 
anticipated. 

The evidence from Al-Dawsariyya, together with that from other sites 
along the Arabian coast, suggests wide-ranging contact by sea round the 
peninsula in the Neolithic period, made possible by the use of small craft, 
making short coastal hops between settlements. Small fishing craft made 
from the ribs of palm branches, of a type which survives in parts of the Gulf 
and Oman to this day (called shasha), would have been well within the 
technical capabilities of these Neolithic people. 

Seven distinct layers of occupation were interspersed with two layers in 
which the site may have been abandoned (Fig. 8.3). The whole surface was 

217 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

up to 30 cm deep in shell fragments, and a loose shell layer separated each 
occupation level from the next. 51 

In antiquity it is likely that there was more water available in eastern 
Arabia than is the case today. This was certainly true in the third millennium, 
the time when the region first begins to develop substantially. At Tel el Ramad 
there is evidence of a considerable settlement, located on a former lake. 52 
Microlith blades set in bitumen, coated with the silica sheen which comes 
from reaping cereals, provide evidence of agriculture. Similar evidence 
has been gathered from the Yabrin oasis at al-Nussi which is contemporary 
with Tel et Ramad and Abqaiq. 53 In this area lay thousands of the 




Figure 8.3 A reconstruction of an Ubaid period settlement on the eastern Arabian 

coast c. 3800 BC. 



218 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

burial mounds which are so typical of Bahrain, whose presence suggests a 
shared or common cultural tradition. The coastal sites formed a culture which 
was orientated towards the sea but the inland settlements were different. In 
Oman the culture was based on agriculture but it was to become much 
involved in the mining and supply of copper to the Mesopotamian cities. At 
Al Hasa, Abqaiq and Yabrin it is probable that the beginnings of oasis 
agriculture can be recognized. 

At the height of the Gulf's ancient prosperity, when Dilmun flourished 
and her trade was, in effect, universal since it touched most of the then 
known world, settlements of substance and wealth were established on the 
Arabian mainland. The most important to be found so far is probably that 
located on the small island of Tarut, close to the mainland to which it is now 
linked by a causeway, somewhat to the north of the Bahrain islands; from 
Al-Rafi'ah, or Tarut, came the most important steatite, statuary and pottery to 
be recovered from the region. 54 Tarut, no doubt, served as the point of access 
to the mainland regions, where the peoples with whom the Dilmunite 
merchants sought to trade, exchanged their goods for the produce of the 
region, particularly its dates. 55 Tarut was not the only significant eastern Arabian 
settlement, however: a substantial site has been identified near Abqaiq, near 
Dhahran, where there are also large tumulus fields. Complexes of tumuli on 
the desert ridges once overlooked a large Neolithic lake and an extinct river 
which apparently flowed from the Al Hasa oasis to the Gulf at this time. 
Mound fields in great numbers have also been located near the great Yabrin 
oasis in the southern part of the province. Late fourth-millennium pottery, 
which some observers have considered might be ancestral to Bahrain's Barbar 
pottery, has also been noted in this region. It is contemporary with Uruk 
pottery in southern Mesopotamia; a pot of apparent Umm an-Nar design is 
thought to have come from Abqaiq. 56 

It is possible to recognize in eastern Arabia at this time the beginnings of 
two other most enduring social structures which have characterized the area 
ever since: the establishment of agricultural communities in the rich oases in 
the hinterland and, on the coast, the creation of coastal settlements. These 
eventually grew from fishing villages to little towns and formed the basis of 
the later third- and second-millennia trading entrepots. 

It has not been possible thoroughly to excavate the tel at Tarut; that it is of 
exceptional antiquity is, however, abundantly clear for Ubaid pottery has 
been observed on its surface. Eventually, no doubt, excavation will begin on 
what could prove to be one of the most important of east Arabian sites for it 
is probable that, before the centre of Dilmun in the early third millennium 
shifted to the island of Bahrain, it was located here. 

From the environs of Tarut has come one of the most remarkable, indeed 
perhaps the most remarkable, of the antiquities of eastern Arabia, which 
suggests something of its importance and prosperity in Dilmunite times. 
This is a very fine white limestone statue, nearly a metre tall, of a man in an 

219 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




Figure 8.4 An exceptionally fine limestone statue, with affinities to the Early 
Dynastic II style in Sumer, of a worshipper or priest c. 2700 BC. From near Tarut. 



220 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

attitude of worship. 57 He has the broad, rather podgy face, with wide, adoring 
eyes with which the Sumerians were accustomed to portray themselves when 
engaged in prayer. He is nude, which suggests that he may be a priest or an 
official, since in early Sumerian times there is evidence that the priests 
conducted their rites in a state of ritual nudity (Fig 8.4). 

The statue is exceptionally well made. If it had been found in a Sumerian 
city it would have been remarkable enough and would be regarded as a fine 
piece of particularly high quality; that it was found 1,000 kilometres (600 
miles) from the nearest Sumerian city makes it more remarkable still. It is 
formidable evidence of the prosperity and importance which the Gulf must 
have enjoyed at the beginning of the third millennium, to which the Tarut 
statue is to be dated. It was found buried in a field by a farmer ploughing his 
land. Naturally enough the villagers (for this was in the 1950s before 
sophisticated notions had reached the region), decided that this shameless 
object was a petrified djinn or evil spirit; the statue was therefore beheaded 
and cut in half. It has now been reassembled, almost pristine, except for 
some damage to the face. It is a very remarkable work of high and quite 
unexpected quality. 

Large quantities of worked steatite have been found on third-millennium 
sites in eastern Arabia, notably at Al-Rafi'ah near Tarut (Fig 8.5). 58 There 
seems to have been a considerable industry in the carving of this tractable 
material into bowls, vases and all manner of vessels. The style of carving is 
extremely distinctive: bold, emphatic and curiously static, often a trifle naive 
in concept but not in execution. The repertory of designs is remarkable: 
large felines, bearded men, nude and heroic, and scenes associated with 
sailing, the sea and fishing. A curious survival is a group of beard curls in 
chlorite, probably imitating the lapis lazuli beards with which the statues of 
the gods or the heads of bulls were often adorned. 

The origin of the steatite itself, which is found throughout third- 
millennium levels in the Gulf and adjacent lands, seems to lie in south- 
western Persia, where evidence of steatite mining has been found at Shahr- 
i Sokta; a source near Jabrin is also known. The trade which depended 
upon the mining of the stone was wide-ranging; and it has been extensively 
studied. 5960 

Some Dilmun seals have been found in eastern Arabia; three were picked 
up from the surface, lying in close proximity to each other, 61 to the north of 
Hofuf. The extent of the Gulf's trading connections and the quality of the 
craftsmanship employed in the manufacture of the stone which was exported 
to it is demonstrated by a beautiful lapis lazuli fragment depicting a man 
wrapped in his cloak (Fig. 8.6). It is a tiny piece but full of vitality; the 
Sumerians and their neighbours seem always to have worked best in a 
relatively small scale. 

Throughout the eastern region there are extensive mound fields of the 
same types of tumulus burials familiar from Bahrain. They appear to cluster 

221 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 






Mii v.C 




Figure 8.5 In the early third millennium there seems to have been a flourishing local 

industry in eastern Arabia in the manufacture of richly decorated chlorite vessels and 

containers. The stone was probably obtained from a source near Jabrin. 

in the same periods: in the second half of the third millennium to the early 
centuries of the second and again in Hellenistic times. 

The Dilmunite tumulus-building industry, which must have absorbed much 
of the community's available labour and resources, especially during the late 
Bronze Age when it was at its height, is an example of the large-scale project 
which requires the commitment of numerous and permanently engaged 
cohorts in the society to bring it to realization. The building of the Pyramids 
is the classic example of such collective, corporate undertakings. 62 They seem 
not only to have been important by reason of their scale and the effect which 
they must have had on the economies from which they sprang but also 
because they exercised a considerable psychological influence on the 



222 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 




Figure 8.6 A small lapis lazuli figurine, of an old man wrapped in a cloak; his hair is 
dressed with a pigtail. Third millennium BC. 



members of the society. By carrying out such massive programmes, requiring 
the involvement of virtually every level of the society and extending over 
centuries, the people came to understand the demands of cooperation and 
the interplay of skills and resources. Such projects are really a form of social 
management in a society whose mass was growing beyond any previously 
known level. So it was in Egypt; so it may have been in Bahrain. 

One of the main concentrations of mound burials is near the airport at 
Dhahran. The tumuli in this area had first been noted by Cornwall 63 but they 
were not surveyed until, first, the Danes in the 1960s 64 and then an expedition 
in the 1980s, with the larger resources of the Saudi Arabian Department of 
Antiquities, carried out work on them. 65 As a result of this it was possible, 
really for the first time, to form some idea of the eastern Arabian society which 
was probably ancestral to Dilmun when it moved to Bahrain as its 'capital'. 
The documentary evidence of contact with Dilmun by the early Sumerian 
communities in Uruk and Kish doubtless refers to this mainland Dilmun. 

The tomb fields, and the settlements of sites like Abqaiq, are clearly earlier 
in date than the communities which appear on Bahrain. The mound fields 

223 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

date from c. 2500 BC; they are therefore approximately contemporary with 
Umm an-Nar in Abu Dhabi. 

The Department of Antiquities estimates that the Dhahran field may have 
numbered some 50,000 mounds. 66 However, unlike most of the Bahraini 
tombs, the Dharan examples were thought to be communal, used over a 
number of generations. 

A wide selection of pottery has been found in the Dhahran tombs; it 
includes Uruk, Jemdet Nasr and Barbar wares, suggesting a broad sweep of 
time and sustained connections with Mesopotamia. 

The construction of the tombs is somewhat simple and less diverse than 
the examples from Bahrain. There are no tombs in eastern Arabia comparable 
with the massive 'Royal Tombs' at Aali. Generally the Dhahran tombs have 
an orientation to the east, that is, the deceased is laid with the head in an 
easterly direction. 

From the Dhahran tombs a group of enigmatic seals has been recovered, 
three of which show clear connections with Egypt or, at the least, with 
Egyptianizing influences. 67 They come from area B2 in the Dhahran 
excavations; one is described as a finely carved frit seal with the depiction of 
a lion and two winged cobras wearing the crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt 
seated on a lotus blossom in two separate panels'. 

The other two seals are both stamps. One is rectangular, made from pale 
blue frit. It shows Horus, in his falcon guise, standing on a cartouche. This 
design, of great antiquity in Egypt, always proclaims the name of the king, as 
the reincarnated Horus, the immanent divinity who personified Egyptian 
kingship. The other, which looks to be less ancient, represents a reclining 
sphinx wearing the crown of Upper Egypt, with hieroglyphic signs in front 
of and above it (Fig. 8.7). Taken with the scaraboid seals from Failaka island, 
dated to around 2000 BC, these seals suggest a degree of contact between 
the Gulf, eastern Arabia and Egypt which is both greater and more sustained 
than had been expected. 

Goblets, like those found at Aali, were also present in the Dhahran tombs. 
They had been thrown on a fast wheel. An unusual material for the 
manufacture of vessels found in the tombs was Muscovite Schist, a 
comparatively rare, golden-hued stone which must have been imported from 
western Arabia, its only known source in the vicinity of the Gulf (Fig. 8.8). 
Chlorite was found in considerable quantity, as might be expected with the 
precedent of the large amounts found on nearby Tarut in mind. Other mound 
fields have been identified at Jabrin, to the south of Dhahran and at Abqaiq. 

A product of which considerable evidence was also found at Dhahran 
were reed baskets coated with bitumen. 68 These were also found on Bahraini 
sites (Fig. 7.25). The excavators suggested that the nearest source of supply 
of bitumen was Hit, in Iraq; 69 however, Cornwall suggested that in antiquity 
there was a bitumen source on Bahrain, though he does not appear to advance 
any very firm authority for the statement. 70 

224 




re 8. 7 Seals from tombs excavated at Dhahran include several with Egyptian, or 
Egyptianized, motifs. 




Figure 8.8 Muscovite schist, also known as 'sunstone', a comparatively rare material, 
seems to have been handled and carved in much the same way as the more familiar 

chlorite. 

225 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Like Bahrain, eastern Arabia seems to have enjoyed two high points of 
prosperity and settlement: in the third and early second millennia and again 
late in the first millennium BC. Nothing yet has been found of the post from 
which Ili-ippasra complained to his superiors in Babylon about the 
depredations of the Ahlamu and their seizure of the dates waiting shipment 
to the capital (see Chapter 7). But in later Hellenistic times the evidence is 
considerable, including the remains of a substantial city at Thaj. 

As yet few sites have been discovered in the eastern region from the 
second and early first millennia BC. This may be due to the difficulty of 
identifying the sparse remains. Some Dhahran tumuli, without pottery but 
with copper and iron arrowheads and personal ornaments, and some of the 
Jabrin sites may be datable to this time: the Jabal al-Makhruq site has produced 
a bronze spearhead. In general habitation sites are characterized by 
rudimentary (probably temporary) structural remains, rough stone tools and 
occasionally a little crude basket-impressed pottery. 

After 1700 BC disruptions in Iraq, Iran and the Levant, and the decline of 
the Indus Valley civilization slowed the flow of international trade which 
had made the Arabian Gulf region prosperous for many centuries. However, 
on the mainland, affecting the coastal sites of eastern Arabia and reaching 
down into the Gulf's southern limits, crucially important changes took place 
during this period, made possible by the growing use of the domesticated 
camel. 71 With increasing aridity after 2000 BC, the people of Arabia separated 
into more mobile camel-herding nomadic tribes, and settled farmers and 
traders in the oases. 

Evidence from Dilmun suggests that the 'Martu' or Amorites, pastoralist 
peoples known to the cities of Mesopotamia and the Fertile Crescent, were 
already active in eastern Arabia around 2000 BC: 72 they, or their ancestors, 
may well have been the cause of the move of Dilmun's centre from the 
mainland to the Bahrain islands. As we have seen, c. 1370 BC the governor 
of Dilmun sent a report to his Kassite overlord in Mesopotamia, complaining 
about a nomadic people called the Ahlamu': 

Around me the Ahlamu have carried away all the dates, thus with me 
there is nothing I can do. But a single town must not be allowed to be 
pillaged'. 73 

Elsewhere, in Mesopotamia, the Ahlamu have been identified with early 
Aramaeans. 

In the early first millennium BC Assyrian records refer to Dilmun (now 
transliterated in its Semitic form, Tilmun') from c. 750 to 600 BC during the 
reigns of Sargon, Sennacherib and Assurbanipal and Babylonian records 
during the reign of Nabonidus, the king who moved his capital from Babylon 
to northern Arabia for approximately eleven years. 74 A period of marked 
prosperity was apparently experienced on the mainland of eastern Arabia, 
which may have been due to the growth of overland trade. Gerrha is said to 

226 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

have been founded by Chaldaeans, expelled in 694 BC from Babylonia by 
Sennacherib for piracy. 

Tombs from Dhahran of this period, c. 800-500 BC, have yielded stamp 
and cylinder seals which show contacts with the Fertile Crescent and southwest 
Arabia, pottery, steatite and incense stands, as well as one of the typical New 
Babylonian 'bathtub' burials, of the type found from the same period at the 
site of City IV on Bahrain. 

Much remains uncertain about the social and political structure of eastern 
Arabia at this time. The most abiding mystery concerns the whereabouts of the 
once great city of Gerrha. This is now unknown, though several locations have 
been suggested for it by commentators and researchers, from Durand onwards. 75 

A number of references to Gerrha and to its famed riches survive in the 
works of the Roman historians and geographers who wrote of the Arabian 
Gulf. Thus Strabo, in his Geography, writes in AD 23: 

After sailing along the coast of Arabia for a distance of two thousand 
four hundred stadia one comes to Gerrha, a city situated on a deep 
gulf; it is inhabited by Chaldaeans, exiles from Babylon; the soil contains 
salt and the people live in houses made of salt; and since flakes of salt 
continually scale off, owing to the scorching heat of the rays of the sun, 
and fall away, the people frequently sprinkle the houses with water 
and thus keep the walls firm. The city is two hundred stadia distant 
from the sea; and the Gerraeans traffic by land, for the most part, in 
Arabian merchandise and aromatics. 76 

Strabo also writes of the already legendary wealth of the Gerraeans and 
some of their contemporaries and neighbours: 

From their trading both the Sabaeans and the Gerraeans have become 
richest of all; and they have a vast equipment of gold and silver articles, 
such as couches and tripods and bowls, together with drinking vessels 
and very costly houses; for doors and walls and ceilings are variegated 
with ivory and gold and silver set with precious stones. 77 

Pliny, the historian, observes, 

The Bay of Gerrha and the town of that name, measures five miles 
around and has towers made of squared blocks of salt. Fifty miles 
inland is the Attene district; and opposite to it and the same number of 
miles distant from the coast is the island of Tyros, extremely famous for 
its numerous pearls. 7 " 

The reference to the towers made of squared blocks of salt may be a description 
of the salt-encrusted blocks of the clay taken from the coastal sabkhas, which 
were fired and then used in buildings in Hellenistic times. 79 

Near the frontier between Saudi Arabia and Qatar three Dilmun seals 
were found lying on the surface.™ They are amongst the relatively few seals 

227 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

which have been discovered in the Kingdom, and, since they tend to be 
associated with Dilmun's later centuries, this may be because the centre had 
shifted from the mainland to the island. 



QATAR 

Qatar itself would at first sight seem unpromising archaeological territory 
compared with Saudi Arabia: a small peninsula jutting out into the Gulf, 
which is wind- and sea-scoured, barren and inhospitable. Yet it has, in fact, 
much to attract the archaeological eye and all that it has is distinctive and 
different from the other states in the region. Indeed it is one of the common, 
if rather curious, features of the archaeology of the Gulf that each little state, 
superficially similar to its neighbours, with which it has certain elements in 
common, maintains an individuality which marks it off from the others as 
firmly as the often somewhat arbitrarily imposed frontiers which now divide 
one from another. 

The neat, painstaking and, in so many ways, persuasive categories into 
which the Qatar Stone Ages were divided by the Danes, early on in their 
expeditions to the Gulf, 81 have been somewhat revised by later, French 
researchers. 82 The earlier divisions suggested that the first Stone Age settlers 
established themselves on archaic shorelines, well into the Qatar deserts of 
today, and were characterized by massive, very brutish-looking handaxes. 
They, the so-called A Group, were, it was suggested, connected with the 
makers of Middle Palaeolithic axes. They were thought to have been followed 
by three other principal Stone Age industries, culminating in the so-called D 
Group, the makers of the fine and elegant tools of the later Neolithic. Now it 
seems likely that all the Qatar tools are from Neolithic times and in common 
with all the other parts of eastern Arabia (though not all the rest of the 
peninsula), there is no evidence of any occupation by humans before the 
Neolithic period. 83 

However, the fact remains that the Qatar deserts, harsh and grudging to 
life as they always seem to be, have yielded a fine repertory of stone tools, 
which remains, indeed, unrivalled in eastern Arabia. No habitation sites have 
been found from periods earlier than the occasional one with Ubaid material. 
There are many workshop sites, however, where Stone Age craftsmen made 
their tools, even the finest, it seems, with speed and precision. 

When the French first cast doubt on the idea of a Mousterian (Middle 
Palaeolithic) date for some of the Qatar artefacts, they suggest that the sea 
transgressed, leaving the existing sabkha behind, about 6,000 years before 
the present. They believe they have identified Ubaid pottery, recovered from 
around the edges of what could have been permanent freshwater stands. 
They identify one site as a fish drying place; whilst extensive fish remains 
have been found, they do not include vertebrae. There is evidence of 

228 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 



,-. :,::il 



Hn IJwulnu. Aft 



R&M HllhlLJ, 




YHkl.ll. 



Map 3 Archaeological sites in the Qatar peninsula. 



229 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

cremation on the site; 84 it appeared to be contemporary with the Ubaid material, 
which is of obvious importance. There is, however, no other evidence in the 
Gulf of the people who used Ubaid pottery practising cremation: rather they 
usually buried their dead, in an extended position. 

A small cairn field nearby was perhaps once an island, 3 to 4 metres in 
diameter. The Ubaid material recovered dates to Ubaid 3- More interesting 
still is the possibility that the French may have identified a Barbar structure 
on a small island in the Bay of Khor. Two typical Barbar pots have been 
recovered from the site. 85 

The products of the Neolithic inhabitants of Qatar are some of the most 
elegant tools produced by any Stone Age people; they are finely and 
beautifully made, the best of them fabricated by the technique of pressure- 
flaking. This consists of striking off tiny, even flakes from the cutting edge of 
a tool during manufacture, thus producing a consistent edge or, if it is required, 
a serrated one. This technique reaches perhaps its highest manifestation in 
Predynastic Egypt, where knives in particular were expertly fashioned to 
produce works of art of the quality of the justly famous ceremonial knife 
from Gebel el-Arak, which is one of the Egyptian documents most frequently 
cited to demonstrate links between Egypt and Mesopotamia in the centuries 
immediately before the supposed unification of Egypt. 86 The Gebel el-Arak 
knife displays a whole repertory of Mesopotamian motifs on its ivory hilt, 
which is as finely made as the blade itself. Only about 2,000 years later were 
craftsmen in Europe producing pressure-flaked tools of comparable grace. 

The flint arrowheads and leaf-shaped scrapers are unquestionably things 
of beauty. It is, of course, an irresistible if idle speculation to wonder whether 
their makers themselves saw them as possessing aesthetic as much as utilitarian 
qualities; probably they did not, though some of them are so sensitively 
worked, improved apparently far beyond the mere levels of their immediate 
usefulness, that it is impossible not to ask the question. 

Amongst the more distinctive products of the Qatar Neolithic is a fine 
blade culture which dates from comparatively early in the sequence, from 
the seventh and sixth millennia. Some of the Qatar Neolithic products could 
have been used as trimming tools, such as the sickle blades, which were set 
into hafts. There is no evidence of an early agricultural phase in Qatar (unlike 
its near neighbour, Bahrain), so it is likely that these tools probably served 
simply to assist in gathering wild grasses. 

Late prehistoric man was physically and intellectually indistinguishable 
from ourselves, his direct descendants. He comes very near us when the 
products of his hands are as fine and as appealing as these from Qatar. 
We know now, from the observation of flint knappers of the present (or 
near present) day, who have kept alive this oldest of man's technologies, 
what a marvellous technique is the making of fine stone tools. In fact, 
though it requires much skill, the knapping of a flint is, to a master, neither 
onerous nor particularly time-consuming; the finest ripple-flaked blade 

230 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

might be made in a morning or less, a fine arrowhead of the type found 
in relative profusion in Qatar, in a matter of 30 minutes or so. But one of 
the qualities that distinguishes the Neolithic craftsman from his 
predecessors in the working of flint and other friable stones is that his 
greater industrial efficiency and his ability to select more manageable 
stone meant that he could produce far more cutting-edged tools per kilo 
of stone than was possible in earlier times. Evidently something 
approaching organized industrial processes was by now employed in 
making stone tools. Preliminary roughing out of the blanks produced 
from suitable 'cores' would take place at a workshop site, the blanks 
being taken then to a superior craftsman at a finishing site. Several such 
workshop sites have been identified in Qatar. 

The sites of the Neolithic people, who were almost certainly migrants 
from outside Qatar and eastern Arabia, were scattered widely over the 
peninsula. Naturally enough, though, their settlements were concentrated 
mainly around the shoreline, for they would have been fisherfolk as well as 
hunter-gatherers, though their fishing would probably have been confined 
to trapping and spearing. 

An incident in the life of a hunter which occurred on a day around 6,000 
years ago is preserved dramatically in one Neolithic artefact which has survived 
in Qatar. 87 Urgent in pursuit of his quarry, the hunter shot his arrow and, it 
must be presumed, missed his target. The arrow was lost, falling into a shallow 
pool or on to marshy ground. Over the millennia a calciferous deposit formed 
around the arrowhead, which is now firmly embedded in what appears to 
be stone. By so trivial an incident, no doubt exasperating at the time, do the 
generations communicate with each other, in this case over an immensely 
long stretch; little could the Qatari hunter of those distant days have dreamed 
that his lost arrowhead would one day act as a witness to the humanity 
which links his day with ours. 

It is possible to infer more about the way of life of the Neolithic inhabitants 
of Qatar, a way of life they would have shared in general with contemporaries 
in eastern Arabia, Bahrain and Oman, where evidence of occupation at 
comparable periods has also been found. It is reasonable, first of all, to 
assume that the population would probably have been significantly more 
numerous than in earlier periods, for just as Neolithic man's techniques of 
tool-making were more skilled, so his more advanced techniques of hunting, 
his ability to move over a larger hunting area and to survive in conditions 
which in earlier times would have been insupportable, meant that a greater 
number could be fed regularly with a more protein-rich diet. Neolithic Qataris 
lived on fish, gazelle and onegar and, as was demonstrated perhaps by the 
small blades which could have been used in sickles, they harvested wild 
cereals and grasses. This probability in fact is made certain by the recognition 
of querns, used for grinding meal, though deliberate domestication of plants 
seems not to have been at their disposal. 

231 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

The wider horizons which had opened to late Stone Age man as a 
consequence of his increased skill at managing his environment and its 
resources had included many new techniques which substantially improved 
his life. The later Qatar Neolithic sustained some elements at least of this 
expanded life style: a spindle whorl, an essential device in the spinning of 
yarn, shows that some form of cloth was produced by the people. 88 Man's 
insatiable need to ornament himself, in life or in death, is demonstrated by a 
sea-snail's shell which has been bored (itself quite a skilful procedure) so 
that it could be threaded and worn, perhaps as an amulet, perhaps simply as 
a decorative addition to what would have been, at best, a rather sparse 
wardrobe. 89 This indeed is what may generally be said for the archaeological 
record in Qatar: despite the rich inheritances of Stone Age artefacts which 
has descended from the more distant times of human experience and apart 
from the inferences which can be made from the evidence of Neolithic times, 
little can be said with assurance about the people who made and used them 
or about their associations beyond Qatar. 

The identification of Ubaid pottery on eastern Arabian sites was followed 
by a similar discovery in 1973 by a British team invited to conduct an 
archaeological survey on the Qatar peninsular for Qatar's planned National 
Museum. 90 There was no reason, at that time, to expect to find any trace of 
the Ubaid in Qatar: such evidence as had been returned from the Arabian 
sites had not indicated such an extent of Ubaid influence in the Gulf coastal 
areas as subsequently became apparent. The presence of Ubaid pottery on 
the island of Bahrain, for example, had not at that time been established; if it 
had been, it would have been reasonable to expect that Qatar, too, might 
contain similar evidence. Anyway, there it was and finding it opened up an 
entirely new dimension in the archaeology of Qatar and of that part of the 
Gulf. The pottery is invariably found in archaeological contexts with the 
stone tools and implements of the Neolithic period. This was indeed the 
case in Qatar too. 

The most important Ubaid site to be found in Qatar was at Al-Da'asa on 
the north-east coast. The site would seem to have been a small seasonal 
encampment, probably the lodging of a hunting-fishing-gathering group which 
returned there from time to time. The site still showed the post-holes of 
whatever shelter the people used; it was most likely a tent though the posts 
could conceivably have been the supports of a hut wall. 

There was a peculiarly poignant find on the Al-Da'asa site which, like the 
embedded arrow, seems to bridge the more than fifty centuries which probably 
separate the time of the Al-Da'asa people and the present day. Near the post- 
holes was found neatly stacked a group of domestic implements, a grinder, 
querns, a piece of coral used for scouring and the like. It was the very tidiness 
of the way they had been piled up together that was particularly moving, as 
though some Neolithic tent-wife had set them carefully aside intending to 
return for them or to use them again. For whatever reason they lay undisturbed 

232 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

for many thousand years: whoever put them there so carefully never returned 
to claim them. 91 

Whilst the pottery found at Al-Da'asa is Ubaid in manufacture, it need not 
be thought that its discovery in Qatar presupposes the presence of the Ubaid 
people themselves. Pottery in ancient times was a greatly valued commodity 
and was traded over considerable distances. The value that would be attributed 
to a pot of the period is demonstrated by one of the larger Qatar-Ubaid 
sherds; this was broken in antiquity and then repaired so that it could continue 
to be used. 

There never was, of course, any question of the Ubaid pottery found in 
Qatar having been made there; it is most unlikely that the region would have 
permitted the degree of settled occupation necessary for a pottery-producing 
society to flourish, with all the equipment necessary in the actual production 
process — kilns, paints, not to mention suitable clays. Indeed, research has 
shown that the Qatar pottery represented by the scatter of sherds, like those 
found in the eastern Arabian sites, was actually manufactured in Ur and 
traded down to the Gulf settlements. 92 It is likely that the Qatar settlements at 
Al-Da'asa represent the same sort of community as those identified in eastern 
Arabia. Presumably the sherds are part of the detritus of peoples with a very 
similar way of life, probably moving seasonally over a comparatively extensive 
territory, which might well, therefore, have included both eastern Arabia 
and Qatar in its range. 

The later periods in Qatar, when the Gulf was the main artery of world 
trade and the settlements on the eastern coast of Arabia became cities of 
great commercial importance, are almost totally barren, with no evidence 
yet discovered of continuous occupation. If any should be found there it is 
unlikely that it will prove to be more than occasional or very minor; certain 
it is that no cities of the scale of those in Bahrain or eastern Arabia were ever 
a feature of Qatar's landscape. No doubt the environment was too harsh, the 
country too bleak and barren even for the hardy travellers of Sumerian, 
Akkadian and Babylonian times. Qatar's is a singularly scoured landscape, 
torn by constant winds; little vegetation grows there, the grazing is sparse 
and water is not readily available. There would be little incentive for settlement 
in times when life was harsh enough anyway. 

A recent, if altogether unexpected, discovery has, however, begun to qualify 
this view of the absence of continuous or significant settlement in Qatar. 
This was the uncovering by the French Expedition of a small site near Al 
Khor which yielded a considerable quantity (estimated at some 2 million) of 
murex shells. 93 The murex is the little creature on which the ancient fame 
and prosperity of the great city of Tyre in the Levant was based. 

From the murex came the superb crimson and scarlet dyes (misnamed 
purple) which lent glamour and a spectacular flourish to the public assemblies 
of the Phoenician cities and, later, of Rome. Remembering the legends of the 
links between the Gulf and the cities of the Levant it is remarkable to find a 

233 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

dye factory (albeit a very small one) in so remote a place on the Qatar 
peninsula. From the pottery which the site has yielded it can be dated to 
Kassite times, late in the second millennium BC. 

Such archaeological remains as there are in Qatar seem to come from 
much later periods, which are really beyond the scope of this present study. 
The Greek presence in the Gulf and eastern Arabia is demonstrated by a 
quantity of sherds of Seleucid pottery which are of a type dating from around 
the second century BC. 94 The Seleucids were the rulers of much of Persia in 
the period following the death of Alexander the Great; they take their name 
from Seleucus, one of Alexander's generals, who seized the Persian throne 
in the anarchy which followed the world-conqueror's death. There is no 
evidence, so far discovered, of a settlement at Ras Uwainat Ali and it seems 
most likely therefore that the literally thousands of sherds of pottery of the 
Seleucid period found there by the Danes (who painstakingly restored three 
whole vessels from the debris) are perhaps the consequence of a shipwreck 
or some other accidental circumstance. 

A more equivocal discovery was made by the Danes by chance when a 
truck in which some members of their expedition were driving sank into a 
cavity in the sand at Ras al-Matbakh. 95 On investigating the hole which they 
had opened up, they found a pithos, a large pot, which had been used as a 
coffin; the remains of the body were still contained within it. From its 
orientation it was clearly not Islamic for it was not directed to the west, 
towards the holy city of Makkah. Since the burial contained no goods nor 
the possessions of the dead, its dating is a matter of conjecture; however, the 
use of the pithos, which is nearly a metre high, recalls the 'bathtub' coffins of 
neo-Babylonian times, examples of which were found at Qala'at al-Bahrain. 
Some scholars, however, point to pithos burials in eastern Arabia which are 
more usually attributed to the second millennium BC rather than to the first. 

In any event, it is a matter of speculation what so great a pottery vessel 
was doing in Qatar in the first place, let alone in what circumstances it was 
used to enclose the body of whoever it was who had the misfortune to die 
there. Certainly it would seem too large to have been transported by land 
and, as in the case of the Ras Uwainat Ali pottery, it is uncharacteristic of the 
people who used the Qatar coast at this time to have produced an artefact so 
majestic, in size at least. Perhaps the explanation may be that it was part of a 
shipborne cargo and that its occupant died at sea but that the conventions 
demanded that he should be returned to earth, cradled in a coffin, albeit a 
makeshift one. The friends of the dead man may have landed at Ras al- 
Matbakh and buried him in this lonely place before continuing with their 
journey. 

Two final categories of remains in Qatar must be considered, though 
briefly, for they too, though obscure chronologically, would seem to belong 
to periods beyond the terminus post quern of this study. The first of these are 
the fields of cairn burials which are found throughout the Qatar peninsula. 

234 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

Cairn burial was a common form of grave construction throughout pre- 
Islamic Arabia: a mound of stones overlying a relatively simple interment. In 
Qatar the cairns are to be found at Umm al-Ma, Mezruah, Ras Abaruk and Ras 
Uwainat Ali. 96 In no case is their chronology particularly explicit. 

At Umm al-Ma there were two types of cairns identified by the Danes who 
first investigated them. 97 The first type is rock-cut, the grave lined with trimmed 
stone blocks. One such grave contained two burials, one on top of the other. 
The second type of grave in this group also contains worked stone blocks 
but is triple-chambered in plan. In such a grave a skeleton was found, lying 
with its legs drawn up. 

At Mezruah a burial was found which seems, if only obscurely, to link 
customs in Qatar in pre-Islamic times with a practice known in other parts of 
Arabia, including Bahrain: the hamstringing of camels around the grave of a 
hero. 98 The grave at Mezruah consisted of an oval-shaped cairn of large flat 
stones; outside it were found the skeletons of camels, crouching on their 
hocks. In the grave a Sassanian glass, almost intact, was found, suggesting 
that the burial might have been late pre-Islamic in date. In addition to camel 
sacrifices there is also evidence of horse sacrifice in pre-Islamic Qatar. 

Mezruah produced the most notable of the very sparse grave goods which 
the cairn burials have so far yielded. The grave in question contained two 
burials; one at least of the occupants was, it is fair to assume, a warrior, for a 
handsome iron sword and a group of well-made iron arrowheads had been 
buried with him. The other skeleton bore the sinister evidence of what was 
evidently a warrior's last battle; embedded in the principal bone of his forearm 
was another arrowhead. It remains there to this day, the grim witness of 
some long-forgotten, but, for the warrior, final encounter. 99 

The last and certainly the most enigmatic of all Qatar's antiquities are to 
be found on the crests of two low hills in the extreme north of the peninsula, 
at Fuweirit and Jusasiyah. 100 On these two little hills, both barely more than 
a sort of rising stone outcrop, there are countless (literally so, since nobody 
so far has had the determination to count them) carvings, patterns and designs 
pecked, cut or gouged into the rock beside some of the most desolately 
beautiful of Qatar's northern shores. The presence of the sea, indeed, adds 
to the sense of isolation of the two little hills, which are backed simply by the 
empty desert. It is this very isolation which contributes to the strangeness of 
these two sites. 

Rock carvings are familiar enough over the whole of Arabia (outside the 
east) to make their discovery in Qatar hardly a matter for comment or even 
surmise. In fact Qatar is notably bare of inscriptions and graffiti; but the 
carvings on the two little rocky hills really are very curious indeed. The 
traveller in the Arabian deserts and the wadis of Oman may be forgiven if he 
forms the impression that, in pre-Islamic times at least, the peninsula was 
inhabited by a race of committed artists who, seeing a rock surface, were 
seized by an urge, universal and irresistible, to carve something on it. The 

235 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

sheer scale of Arabian rock-carving, which in individual examples must 
amount at least to hundreds of thousands, suggests an earnestness and 
application in the decoration of rock surfaces which is perhaps surprising to 
those who know the desert and its people today. The tradition continues, as 
demonstrated in Oman, where, alongside what may be third-millennium 
designs, the outlines of Land Rovers, rifles and other contemporary gear are 
delineated. 

By far the most frequent design to be found on the two hills is that which 
consists of what are most generally called 'cup-marks': small circular pits cut 
into the rock surface, their sides curving to a rounded depression; they are 
usually not more than 3 to 5 centimetres in diameter, and less in depth. In 
Qatar they are occasionally found singly but far more frequently they are 
massed together, in a seemingly endless variety of formations, single lines, 
double and treble lines, sometimes straight and sometimes curving, sometimes 
circular, sometimes a circle of cups with one in the centre, in formations of 
six, eight, twelve, fourteen, sixteen and onwards, with no apparent progression 
or sequence. They seem to be distributed at random over the surface of the 
little hills; they appear to follow no evident orientation, neither solar, lunar 
nor stellar. 

Those who have studied them have proposed, basically, two explanations 
for them; neither is entirely satisfactory. It has been suggested, on the analogy 
with similar formations in Europe, particularly in Scandinavia, that they are 
in some way associated with fertility, a proliferation of vulvas into which the 
life-giving rain pours. This may or may not be the explanation of cup forms 
in northern Europe, dating from the Bronze Age; it seems unlikely in eastern 
Arabia if only because the cups are so small, and vulvae, other than perhaps 
in the most febrile imaginations, rarely come in groups. 

During the lifetime of man, too, rain in the desert is a comparatively rare 
phenomenon, at least to the extent that it seems unlikely that so universal a 
practice in northern Qatar as the making of cup-marks for the purpose of 
catching rainfall would have prevailed so extensively. A more tenable 
suggestion was that the cup-mark formations were boards for playing the 
game called in Arabia huwais, but which is known throughout the world 
under different names and many forms. In essence the game, which is played 
by two people, consists in moving counters (stones, beans or any other 
handy alternative) round the board, the moves being determined by the 
throw of dice or other mechanism. The game is played amongst the Badu to 
this day; it has been suggested that it is African in origin and of great antiquity. 

Convenient though this explanation would be, it is ultimately unsatisfactory 
on several grounds. The various configurations in which the cup-marks are 
distributed are not consistent; inconsistent too are their locations, and the 
fact that at least one example is to be found on the side of a rock, almost in 
an overhang, demonstrates that it at least could not have been used to contain 
anything, liquid or solid. 

236 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

But at the end of the day, the sheer quantity of cup-marks in countless 
formations destroys the argument that they were used only for huwais, unless 
the making of them had some ritual significance, as though the marking out 
of a roulette table or tennis court carried with it substantial indulgences, 
releasing its maker from so many years' penance in some games-playing 
purgatory, for example. It seems very unlikely that the players either made a 
fresh board each time they wished to play — by the time they had finished 
making the board, night, if not their enthusiasm, would have fallen — or that 
there would have been so many games in progress simultaneously that several 
hundreds (if not thousands) of boards would be necessary. It seems 
improbable that this very remote spot in the north of the Qatar peninsula 
was ever the site of so extensive and feverish a cult of huivais-playing as to 
make the saloons of Vegas or of Monte Carlo seem atrophied and empty 
either of activity or excitement. It is simply too far-fetched. 

Another, more prosaic explanation might be that the cup formations were 
associated in some way with the pearl trade in which Qatar's pre-oil prosperity 
was grounded. The sorting of pearls of different sizes and qualities is an 
essential element in the trade's management and the rewards, often meagre 
enough, of the fishermen. The cups could have been used for this purpose, 
though again their quantity, their location so far from the normal habitations 
of the pearl merchants, and the variety of their composition and disposition 
over the rocks make this, too, seem unlikely. 

But the cup-marks, extensive though they are, are only one form of carving 
on the two rocky hills, close to the sea shore. Still more enigmatic, because 
they are quite without precedent in Qatar or, so far as is known, anywhere 
else, is a series of large carvings, painstakingly cut out on the rock surface, 
which, at first sight, appear to be representations of boats, seen in plan. 
Masts, cross-seats, thwarts seem all to be depicted and some of the boats 
appear to be trailing large anchors. However, the explanation of these carvings, 
of which there is a particular concentration on Jusasiyah, as showing some 
sort of sailing-craft, is perhaps too simple: some of the drawings which initially 
seem to represent boats can, at a second glance, look more like fish, with 
long feathery tails, whilst others, more remarkably still, seem to be of huge 
scorpions, crawling across the rock face. They are altogether strange, sinister 
and, seen at sunset with the dying sun glancing across them, rather disturbing. 

Some of the boats, in the view of some authorities, may be pearlers. 
Thus far only one serious study of the rock carvings has been made. 101 The 
author recorded many of the carvings and, so far as the ship representations 
are concerned, concluded that they might be of fourteenth century AD 
date. Even this conclusion must be regarded as very tentative; but if this 
dating were to be substantiated, it would still not explain why anyone 
should have troubled to have portrayed boats, fishes or scorpions (or perhaps 
something which contains the elements of all three) on such a scale, in so 
obscure a place. 

237 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Other carvings in the same spot add to the mystery, rather than diminish 
it. Circular pits cut into the rock have been compared with the fire-pits found 
across the Gulf and associated with Iranian fire-cults of pre-Islamic times. 
Others seem to be crude offering-tables with long runnels extending from 
them, as though to allow for the running off of some liquid or other. Some of 
these sometimes have the look of schematic, horned beasts. 

Of quite another sort is a small, elegant and very heavily weathered carving 
of an ibex or other caprid. This is the most deliberately representational of 
all the northern group of Qatar rock carvings and would certainly not look 
out of place in a third-millennium, or even earlier, Mesopotamian context. 
Once again the question of what it is doing in Qatar, far from any evident 
signs of occupation with which it might be associated, obtrudes itself — but 
no answer is forthcoming. But that is the way of Qatar's archaeology as a 
whole; at present, it proposes more questions than it provides answers. 



THE UNITED ARAB EMIRATES 

Further still along the coast, eastwards from the Qatar peninsula, lies the 
most recently invented state in the area, the United Arab Emirates, a 
confederation of seven little principalities paradoxically united into a highly 
individual and improbable republic. The seven states, Abu Dhabi, Dubai, 
Sharjah, Umm al-Qawain, Ras al-Khaimah, Fujairah and Ajman, represent 
ancient (more or less) tribal or clan territories. The first three are rich, Abu 
Dhabi immensely so: the latter four are not and depend on the fortunes of 
their richer brothers. 

It now seems likely that the earliest developed culture in the Gulf was 
located in its southern reaches, on what is today the coast of the United Arab 
Emirates. Historically speaking, it is difficult not to recognize that this area 
represents the northern extent of Oman, for the coastal region in which the 
states and cities of the UAE are today located is really an extension of the 
piedmont of the northern limits of the Jebel Akhdar and of Ras Musandam to 
the east. Some of the earliest settlements in the Gulf, dating to the very 
beginning of the third millennium, were located inland from the coast near 
the copper- mines; later, the islands which today lie close off shore were the 
sites from which copper was trans-shipped to Dilmun and the cities of 
Mesopotamia. 

In recent years, more precisely since the mid-1980s, the United Arab 
Emirates has seen some of the most productive archaeological work to be 
undertaken in the Gulf. It was known from the early days of the Danish 
Expeditions that sites in the Emirate of Abu Dhabi were very early and 
exceptionally important; what only became evident in more recent years 
was that there had been settlements on the southern coast at least from the 
late third millennium onwards, the product, no doubt, of the search for copper 

238 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

and the need to keep open the lines of supply from the source of the metal 
to the customers in Sumer and, in all probability, elsewhere. 

What was less to be expected perhaps was that this part of the Gulf, very 
remote indeed from any of the principal centres of population with which 
Dilmun maintained contact, was the location for much earlier movements 
of people. At the time of the floruit of the Jemdet Nasr horizon in 
Mesopotamia, the people who built the distinctive tombs in northern Oman, 
identified with the site of Hafit, were active over a considerable geographical 
area. Evidence of their presence has now been found from eastern Arabia 
to Dhofar, in the far south of Oman, bordering the Indian Ocean. The 
activity with which the Hafit people were involved was probably pearling 
or the fishing of the exceptionally rich seas around the Oman coast, a 
resource which is sustained to this day. Hafit pottery and the handsome 
tombs in which the people were buried have been dated to approximately 
3100- 2900 BC. 

It is possible that the people from these early settlements were responsible 
for the 'colonizing' of the northern Gulf lands, including Bahrain. 102 The 
earliest burial mounds on Bahrain bear a strong resemblance to those from 
Umm an-Nar and the building techniques employed in the stone-built 
structures of Bahrain seem to echo those of the northern Omani coastal 
settlements. Umm an-Nar tombs usually are designed to hold multiple 
burials, unlike many, perhaps the majority, of the Bahrain mounds. Probably 
each tomb was used on many occasions, over a protracted period, for 
Umm an-Nar forms of pottery as well as funerary architecture continued 
throughout most of the third millennium. The tombs are circular, the interior 
divided into a number of chambers, the configuration of which varies 
considerably. The exteriors of the larger examples were faced with finely 
cut limestone blocks. A very large quantity of fine pottery and carved chlorite 
vessels has been excavated from the many tombs which have been 
examined, the evidence, clearly, of elaborate rituals of offerings for the 
comfort of the dead. 

One of the most frequently encountered architectural forms in the Gulf is 
the large watch-tower, of which examples have been found from Failaka to 
Oman. It is probable, to judge by the examples found at Hili in Abu Dhabi 
and further described below, that these were also the invention of the Hafit 
people. If so, the towers have had a remarkable survival, since they have 
continued to be built in Oman in modern times. 

The Hafit people were probably either related to or were in considerable 
contact with the early inhabitants of southern Mesopotamia, for associated 
with them have been found a characteristic form of brick from the Sumerian 
cities, plano-convex in shape. They also used a distinctive tanged arrowhead 
which has been found in some quantity in the southern Gulf sites. In this 
context, among the Hafit people's associations, it is interesting that the even 
earlier evidence of people in the Gulf who were in contact with the makers 

239 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

of Ubaid pottery in the early part of the fourth millennium, have been found 
now in much the same area and in many of the same locations as the Hafit 
pottery. Ubaid pottery certainly reached the southern coast and probably 
will be found in Omani sites. 

By the beginning of the third millennium some of the sites on the southern 
coast and further inland were well established and, for their time, quite 
sophisticated, at least to judge by their architecture. The further excavation 
of their remains is likely to produce important information on the life of 
these small and remote settlements in such early times. 

On Umm an-Nar island, the principal settlement of the period to be 
excavated, the remains of stone-built houses have been found; it is the 
exteriors of these buildings which were finished with mud-brick, 103 which 
are of the characteristic Mesopotamian form known as plano-convex. 
The bricks look rather like loaves of bread and are the most typical material 
from which Sumerian buildings were made. In the context of the Gulf 
this evidence from Umm an-Nar is particularly intriguing, for further up 
the Gulf, in Bahrain for example, there is no evidence of the use of such 
Sumerian building materials, though structures like the temples at Barbar, 
whilst built in stone, seem to be Sumerian in inspiration and design. If 
this was so, then it would suggest Mesopotamian influences or indeed 
the actual presence of people intimately aware of Mesopotamian building 
techniques, matched with a local Gulf building tradition. Some of the 
buildings at Umm an-Nar were substantial, one of them occupying more 
than 300 square metres. Towers similar to those which are to be found at 
Omani inland sites such as Ibri and Bat have been found at Hili too, 
which suggests that the inhabitants needed to protect their communities 
from marauders. 104 The prevalence of the tower as a dominant architectural 
form in the early Gulf cultures receives further confirmation from these 
structures. 

The inhabitants of Hili in the third millennium were notably robust: the 
average height, based on an anthropological analysis of nearly 200 individuals, 
was 1 .78 m for the males and 1 .72 m for females, quite remarkable proportions 
for people of 4,000 years ago. 105 

From the quality of the architecture and the grave goods recovered, 
particularly the pottery, it is evident that the Umm an-Nar people, though 
probably only a very small community, enjoyed a high and rapidly advancing 
level of prosperity in the early years of the third millennium. This community 
appears to be considerably earlier even than the first people to live in the 
original city at the Qala'at al-Bahrain; Umm an-Nar pottery has indeed been 
discovered at the bottom of the earliest harbour wall there. 106 It becomes 
increasingly likely that people from Umm an-Nar were involved in the original 
settlement of the Qala'at site at Bahrain. Graves of Umm an-Nar type or 
influence are present in Bahrain and are the earliest in that island's long 
catalogue of funerary architecture. Umm an-Nar burials have now been 

240 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

identified over a wide range of eastern Arabia and down into the southern 
Gulf, as far as Ras Al-Had on the central Oman coast. 

Umm an-Nar pottery is very distinctive. Like the later pottery from other 
coastal sites such as Ras al-Khaimah, it seems to have affiliations with sites 
across the Gulf in south-western Iran and, possibly, others in Baluchistan 
and Afghanistan. The importance of the Umm an-Nar community to the Gulf 
in the early centuries of the third millennium lies in the fact that it was the 
point from which copper, mined in what is today the Sultanate of Oman at 
sites to the south of Umm an-Nar, in the Buraymi and Ibri oases, was shipped 
via Dilmun to the cities of Sumer. 107 

One of the intriguing elements in the archaeology of the Umm an-Nar 
community is the evidence of their diet. 108 They were largely a fishing people 
and amongst the debris of their occupation the remains of a dugong, or sea- 
cow, have been found. 109 It was evidently butchered at Umm an-Nar to feed 
the settlers there. The Umm an-Nar settlement also produced evidence of 
the consumption of the camel, though it is not known whether this should 
be taken as proof of domestication; probably not, on the basis of more general 
evidence. 110 

There is some evidence that sorghum was cultivated in this part of the 
coast. This is particularly significant for it is generally accepted that sorghum 
was first cultivated in northern Sudan. It appears in very early levels at Hili, 
at the beginning of the third millennium; it is known in Oman from even 
earlier times. 111 It appears in India c. 2000 BC and it would seem therefore 
that it was carried from west to east, from Africa via Arabia to India. It is a 
nice speculation what people may have effected its transfer over this 
considerable distance. 

At Hili an altogether different situation persisted from that in Umm 
anNar, though the site also dates from early in the third millennium. 112 
The funerary architecture at Hili is altogether remarkable. A large circular, 
drum-like tomb has been restored at Hili and displays a number of 
remarkable carvings in relief which seem to have served as decorative 
elements in the architecture of some of the larger tombs (Fig. 8.9). They 
are quite extraordinary and unlike anything else in their immediate 
context. 113 Whilst the decoration of rock surfaces is a practice which seems 
to have engaged the enthusiasm of the ancient inhabitants of much of the 
Arabian peninsula (though not generally in the east except, as will shortly 
be seen, in Oman) to an almost obsessional degree, the Hili carvings are 
of quite a different sort. There are several distinct scenes depicted: an 
erotic group of an embracing couple (Fig. 8.10), a design which almost 
exactly repeats much earlier ones from Catal Huyiik in Anatolia and Ain 
Sakhri, a Natufian site in Palestine; two felines, possibly leopards, tearing 
a smaller animal (Fig. 8.11); a group of travellers (Fig 8.10), and two very 
handsome oryx (Fig. 8.12). 114 

One of the most important developments in the archaeology of the 

241 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




Figure 8.9 The circular decorated tomb at Hili, Abu Dhabi, as restored, third 

millennium BC. 



southern Gulf has been the identification of Ubaid-period pottery on a number 
of sites. Thus far, only Oman does not appear to have any evidence of contact 
with the makers of Ubaid pottery and that situation may well change in the 
future. 

That the southern regions of the Gulf in particular have much more to 
reveal is clearly demonstrated by the excavations which archaeological teams 
from a variety of countries have been conducting and which continue to do 
so in sites all along the coast of the United Arab Emirates. In a number of 
cases third-millennium shorelines are now located as much as a kilometre or 
more inland; this is the case, for example, with a large mound at Tel Abraq, 
on the borders of Sharjah and Umm al-Qawain. 115 This has yielded evidence 
of continuous settlement from the middle of the third to the middle of the 
first millennium BC. 

Tel Abraq was obviously a substantial community. A very large tower 
structure has been excavated there, with a diameter of 40 metres. 116 This 
means that it is considerably larger than contemporary towers to the south at 
locations such as Hili and Bat, which are approximately half the size of the 
Tel Abraq tower. 

The repeated discovery of towers throughout the Gulf, which are 
represented from Failaka island in the north to the copper-related sites in 



242 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

Oman and which are now to be recognized as almost as typical a Gulf 
architectural feature as the fields of grave mounds, is a remarkable aspect of 
the archaeology of the past two decades. The oldest examples of the towers 
seem to be on the northern coast of the Oman peninsula, in what is today 
the territory of the United Arab Emirates and in Oman itself. 

The Tel Abraq site has already augmented considerably knowledge of the 
Umm an-Nar period on the coast and added to the repertory of pottery of the 
periods during which it flourished. 

Whilst the work on the early sites in the UAE has tended to dominate 
reports of archaeology from the country, important excavations from later 
periods have been recorded over recent years. Most of the remains, whilst 
they testify to continuing international connections, and are doubtless to be 
associated with trade in the region, are quite distinctive and not merely 
reflections of the apparently much more advanced and assertive Dilmun 
culture located further up the Gulf. 

One type of grave which seems to have been specific to this part of the 
Gulf coast during the second millennium BC is a long, narrow, communal 
tomb, partly sunken into the ground. Chlorite vessels (Fig. 8.13) with a 
bulbous base and tapering to a narrower neck, inscribed with pierced circles 
and a number of dress ornaments including some made in gold, silver and 
bronze, were recovered from such graves. Tombs of this type have been 
found at Qattara (Fig. 8.14), Al Qusais near Dubai, and at Shimal in Ras Al- 
Khaima; 117 in the case of the last some Harappan artefacts, pottery and a 
weight were excavated, suggesting connections with the Indus Valley. 118 
There appears to have been an extensive settlement at Shimal, located at 
the foot of the small mountain range (Fig. 8.15); 119 a similar settlement was 
located at Dhayah. 

A sizeable Iron Age settlement was established at Hili and another at 
Rumailah. 120 Large, well-built tombs were associated with the settlements 
and there is evidence of cults including the worship of snakes, approximately 
contemporary with the snake cults which seem to be evident up the Gulf in 
Bahrain. 121 

In Hellenistic times, when the Gulf was actively involved with the incense 
trade from the southern Arabian kingdoms, a major port was established at 
Ed-Dur, in Umm al-Qawain. 122 This has been excavated by a British team; a 
French expedition has been responsible for the excavation of a 
contemporaneous town at Mleiha, further inland from the coast, located, 
like Shimal, at the foot of the mountains. 123 

The interest of the various states in their archaeology has been mixed 
and they have only been described here in a general and cursory fashion. 
Abu Dhabi has encouraged excavation and some ambitious reconstructions 
of some of her important and very early monuments. Dubai has carried out 
spasmodic surveys whilst Ras Al-Khaimah commissioned a distinguished 
British researcher to survey its northern regions, which resulted in some 

243 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 





I I 






■ 









Figure 8.10 A man riding a donkey, accompanied by another (left) and an embracing 
(or dancing?) couple (right); the Hili tomb. 




Figure 8.11 Two felines tearing a smaller animal; the Hili tomb. 



244 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 




Figure 8.12 Two oryx in confrontation, with two figures between and beneath them, 
holding hands; the Hili tomb. 



of the better publications on the area. 124 Recently some evidence of copper- 
smelting has been found there, which suggests that Ras Al-Khaimah was also 
one of the points from which copper was trans-shipped up the Gulf from its 
source in Oman. 125 There has also been identified at Ghadilah a form of 
tomb unlike the others for which this part of the Ras Al-Khaimah coast is 
known, with a profile like a pill-box'. 126 



THE SULTANATE OF OMAN 

The last of the Gulf territories which contributed much to its culture in antiquity 
is that which is today contained within the northern part of the Sultanate of 
Oman. The second largest country in the Arabian peninsula, often spectacularly 
beautiful, diverse in its topography and with a rich admixture of peoples and 
traditions, Oman is markedly different in character from its neighbours. It is 
one of the few distinct nation-states in the Arab world, with a firmly defined 
identity of its own. This it seems always to have had; the mediaeval Arab 
geographers and historians tend to emphasize its essentially individual and 
homogeneous character. 



245 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

In the texts of the ancient Sumerians and their successors, Dilmun is 
frequently linked with two other lands, Melukhkha, which is now 
considered to be the Indus Valley region, and Magan or, as it is sometimes 
transliterated, Makkan. From Magan came much of the Sumerian city- 
states' most important imported commodity, the staple of their economies, 
copper. Magan is today identified with Oman and parts of the northern 
coast now within the political boundaries of the United Arab Emirates; 
sometimes the term may also have included areas of the coast across the 
Straits of Hormuz. 

Oman occupies much of the south-eastern quadrant of the Arabian 
peninsula though it is geographically, as it has always tended to have been 
historically, isolated from its neighbours. This isolation has contributed much 
to the Sultanate's particular character. 

Indeed, strictly speaking, Oman is only in part a Gulf state; much of 
her extensive coastline borders the Indian Ocean. It is this geographical 
isolation which has most contributed to the Omani experience throughout 
history, a history which has been most notably a record of Oman's 
marriage with the sea. Oman is cut off from her northern and western 
neighbours by the central and southern Arabian deserts which divide 
the coastal strip, in which most of Oman's historic towns are concentrated, 
from the rest of the peninsula. This division is strengthened by the 
presence of the great range of mountains, the Jebel Akhdar, which runs 
north to south down most of the length of the country. To the west of 
Oman, and north of her fertile southern provinces, lies the Rub' al- 
Khali, the Empty Quarter or, more simply, the Sands, as they are called 
by the local people. This gigantic waste, some 400,000 square kilometres 
(250,000 square miles) of deep and constantly moving sands, was, in 
late Neolithic times, a region of swamps and marshes, in particular on 
its northern periphery, where evidence of Neolithic settlements has been 
found in abundance. 127 Then, bodies of water ran down from the Rub' 
al-Khali to the sea, making the coast of what was once called Trucial 
Oman, and which today is the United Arab Emirates, a string of islands 
of which Umm an-Nar is a survivor. 

Sailing southwards from the Gulf, a vessel must pass through the Straits of 
Hormuz (to the Iranian shores of which the Empire of Oman once extended 
in middle Islamic times) out into the Gulf of Oman, the beginning of the 
Arabian Sea, and the first ocean water that the sailor meets on the route to 
the Indian subcontinent. The prevailing winds and currents of this region 
have had a considerable influence on the development of Omani history, 
bringing her ships eastwards to India and beyond, and westwards to the east 
African coast. 

Thus Oman's long coastline has had a profound influence on the course 
of her history; her people have always been energetic and courageous seamen, 
probably from the earliest times. Oman's ships are distinctive and her sailors 

246 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 







i|^H 


§ ®/@ 




1 


9 'M- $ 





Figure 8. 13 A chlorite beaker from Wadi Asimah, third millennium. 




Figure 8.14 A communal tomb at Qattara, showing its entrance and reused Umm an- 
Nar stonework, second millennium BC. 



247 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




Figure 8. 15 An excavated tomb at Shimal, Ras Al-Khaima, second millennium BC. 



were foremost amongst the seamen of Islam, their fame spreading throughout 
the world in the time of the Arab empires. Omani seamen opened up the sea 
routes to China and the east, and at the height of the Arab caliphates her 
cities were reckoned amongst the most populous and splendid in Islam — 
which effectively meant, at that time, in the entire world. 

Oman differs from other parts of Arabia in respect of the variety of climate 
and the consequently varied ecology which she enjoys. Much of the country 
is desert, the home of camel-rearing nomads; the mountain valleys and 
terraces, however, are in parts richly fertile and bear a variety of fruits and 
crops impossible to cultivate in other parts of eastern or central Arabia, whilst 
in the far south the green and undulating foothills of Dhofar are the home of 
Arabia's only cattle-breeders, archaic tribes which still speak non-Arabic 
languages in the confines of their family groups. The south of the country 
catches the tail of the monsoon season, its rains bringing the prospect of 
intense cultivation to the land which it touches. Again, Oman is unique in 
this for it is the only part of the peninsula within the monsoon's reach. 

It appears that even as early as the late fourth millennium, and certainly 
by the beginning of the third, Oman was in touch with other centres in the 
region of the Gulf. The evidence for this degree of wide-ranging contacts is 



248 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 




a. 
p 

D 



s 


75 


w 


? 







H 




< 


c 


Tj 


1) 


3j 


« 


.t^ 


c 


c 


75 


5 


_7^ 




5 


u 


c/5 














c 








c/l 




1) 












w 








75 




O 








SO 


















J 








249 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

the pottery found on several sites in the Sultanate which show connections 
with Umm an-Nar to the north, with Kulli across the Gulf in Baluchistan, 
with western Iran and, later, with the Barbar levels at Bahrain. So far no 
other Gulf site has produced comparable material to show, apparently, so 
broadly cast a net of interconnections which, as this pottery suggests, Oman 
enjoyed in such very early times. The reason for this evident concentration 
of foreign contact was once again trade and in particular, in Oman's case, 
almost certainly trade based on the ancients' search for hard stones for building 
and sculpture and for sources of one of the most important elements in their 
economies, copper. 

In the early inscriptions relating to trade and the carriage of merchandise, 
the term 'Magan-boat' is often employed; a case in point is the myth Enki 
and the World Order in which, it may be recalled, the god declares that he 
'moored the Dilmun-boat to the ground, loaded the Magan-boat skyhigh'. 128 
This presumably is to be taken as a demonstration of the exceptional 
prosperity that Enki brought to both places, as witnessed by the heavy 
loads borne by their craft; it may also refer to the type of boat which it was 
customary to use on the run between Magan and the markets with which it 
had dealings, no doubt Dilmun-Bahrain, perhaps the Indus cities, maybe 
Sumer itself. In the light of Oman's subsequent history of intense involvement 
with the sea and seamanship it is conceivable that even this early the 
Maganites were renowned sailors and reference to them in such a context 
would produce the same degree of recognition and response which might 
be expected from a similar reference to the better known lands of Dilmun 
and its sailing ships. It may be, too, that Magan-boat' meant something like 
'China Clipper' would have done to a nineteenth-century participant in the 
Far Eastern trade. 

It is, of course, even possible that a particular type of boat originating in 
Magan is also meant. Oman has produced at least one vessel which may be 
peculiar to itself and which is of great antiquity: the 'sewn-boat' whose planks 
are stitched together without the use of nails and which is used extensively 
in Omani waters to this day. 129 This explanation would also require the 
'Dilmun-boat', referred to in the same text, to represent a specific type; for 
this there is no evidence, though the representations on seals, for example, 
do seem to show a variety of types of boat in use, several of which might 
have originated in the Gulf trade. 

What particularly lured merchants and seamen to Oman in Early 
Dynastic times as well as later was the prospect of copper, present in 
substantial quantities and relatively easily mined. References in early texts 
to 'the Mountain of Copper' 130 are thought to refer to Magan, for Oman 
might well be memorable to its early visitors by reason of the high 
mountains which are so dominating a feature of the landscape in the 
northern half of the country, where the copper deposits are located. This 
assumption is less definite now, in most scholars' views, but there is no 

250 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

doubt that Oman was an important source of copper in antiquity; the 
areas which were mined are still visible, as are the great heaps of slag 
remaining from the smelting operations which were evidently carried out 
close to the source of supply. The fact that Oman's copper contains a 
relatively high concentration of arsenic, which is also found in 
Mesopotamian copper artefacts, is suggestive, but it cannot yet be regarded 
as decisive proof of an Omani provenance for specific samples of Sumerian 
copper until analytical techniques are further refined. 

There are extensive workings in copper-rich areas of the Wadijizzi system 
in northern Oman which have been worked since the third millennium; the 
surface workings which are to be seen today date from Islamic times when 
Oman was once again developed as an important source (Fig. 8.16). There 
are, in addition, extensive third-millennium workings in the Wadi Andam 
and Wadi Ibra. There seems little doubt that the communities which existed 
there depended upon the exploitation of the copper resources. The 
devastation which smelting on this scale must have wrought on the forests, 




Figure 8.16 Ancient copper workings in the wadis of northern Oman 

251 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

particularly on the acacia trees which grew extensively on the mountain 
slopes of Oman, and hence the effect on Oman's ecology and perhaps on its 
climate, has already been noted (see Chapter 2). 

Nothing very precise is known about the actual mechanism of the third- 
millennium copper-trade in the Gulf. How the copper was mined, whether 
by slaves or by freemen, what was the nature of Oman's political and 
mercantile systems at the time, are all unknown. We do not know whether 
colonies of Sumerian merchants were established in Oman on the model of 
other outposts of their culture, or whether Oman's traders themselves travelled 
up the Gulf to Dilmun and Sumer. The name of only one king of Magan is 
known to us at present. This is Manium, whose only claim to fame is that he 
was defeated by Naram-Sin, the grandson and eventual heir of the great 
Sargon of Akkad. Manium has sometimes been confused with Menes, the 
putative unifier of the two Egyptian kingdoms, but Menes lived a thousand 
years earlier than Manium. Naram-Sin faced a general rebellion in his empire 
when he assumed power. Evidently control of the copper-trade was worth 
mounting what must have been a substantial expedition, with greatly extended 
lines of supply, from Akkad down the Gulf to Magan. But it seems he was 
victorious and recorded his victory on various objects which were dedicated 
to his gods in gratitude. 131 

In Bahrain, on the foreshore at the Qala'at al-Bahrain city site, copper 
fragments and the remains of whole ingots were found, suggesting that the 
ore may have been exported to Bahrain and smelted into ingots before being 
sent on to Sumer. In the workshops of the little cities it would have been 
converted into tools and traders' vessels, weapons, statues and offerings for 
the gods, inlays and ornaments for furniture — a thousand different uses for 
a metal which helped to transform the old Neolithic communities into the 
civilized city populations of the third millennium and later. The amalgam 
with tin, in which copper becomes the even harder-edged bronze, gave a 
name to this period of third- and second-millennia development, the Bronze 
Age, in the nomenclature of nineteenth-century archaeology. 

Early in the third millennium, at the beginnings of the Mesopotamian 
cities' prosperity, Oman too was prosperous, supporting a sizeable 
population, some of whom lived in fortified townships of an architectural 
sophistication and of a character, so far as it is yet possible to judge, distinct 
from that of other urban centres of the third-millennium Gulf. 132 Indeed, 
some of the earliest material in the Gulf region, other than the Ubaid (which 
seems not to be present in Oman) comes from these early Omani settlements. 
A Jemdet Nasr horizon has been identified in sites such as Jebel Hafit, Ibri 
and Bat, amongst others. 133 This dates to around 3000 BC and is consequently 
earlier than any settlements known in Bahrain or eastern Arabia, other 
than the Ubaid-connected ones on the coast. The Ubaid is not known in 
Oman though of course it is present on the coast of what is today the 
United Arab Emirates. 

252 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 




Figure 8.17 The round fortified tower at Nizwa before the modern development of 
the town. This demonstrates the relationship of the tower to the settlement; the 
Nizwa tower is the descendant of those built in northern and central Oman, from the 

early third millennium BC. 



Amongst the most remarkable phenomena in Oman, and another testament 
to the longevity of architectural forms in these parts, are the observation 
towers which have been identified on some of these early sites. 134 They 
were, in all probability, observation posts protecting the little settlements 
against raiders; they seem generally to have contained water wells which 
presumably they also protected and they would have provided protection 
for the villagers in case of attack. The most notable are situated at Ibri and at 
Bat; there are also examples in the United Arab Emirates at Hili, where one 
tower was surrounded by a moat. 135 One of the towers at Hili appeared to 
date from around 3000 BC, much earlier than any other similar structure. 136 



253 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

The towers are the direct ancestors of towers such as that at Nizwa, built in 
the eighteenth century in the form in which it now stands and which thus 
has an ancestry of at least 5,000 years (Fig. 8.17). 

An otherwise unprecedented but probably very early fragment of pottery 
came from an unrecorded excavation of a grave in northern Oman. The 
sherd derives from a spouted vessel; it is of a fairly coarse red ware painted 
with black. It is significant because of its decoration, which suggests 
connections with other lands, particularly Iran, perhaps as early as the late 
fourth millennium BC. 

The decoration on the sherd is particularly interesting for it shows a group 
of dancers, hand in hand in a landscape dominated by three triangles, which 
look suspiciously like pyramids but which, since the sherd is clearly a good 
deal earlier than the earliest pyramid, they certainly are not. In fact they are 
probably intended to represent mountains, perhaps the great central Oman 
chain, the Jebel Akhdar. What is notable is that the motif of the dancers 
holding hands appears in Elam, and in Egypt from Predynastic times, whilst 
the two elements, of dancers and mountains, are frequently combined in 
late Predynastic Egyptian pottery. 137 

The distinctive character of Oman in antiquity is further borne out by the 
funerary architecture of its early inhabitants. Oman shares in the extraordinarily 
widespread practice of tumulus building but her tombs are different from 
those in, for example, Bahrain or Saudi Arabia. One group is similar to those 
identified at Umm an-Nar in Abu Dhabi, but the Abu Dhabi examples must 
really be regarded as the Omani type reaching up to the northern coastline; 
there can be little doubt that the form of the Umm an-Nar tombs is Omani in 
origin, as the same type is to be found throughout northern Oman, distributed 
over a widely dispersed area. 

Many examples of these formidable, beehive-shaped tombs are to be 
found, generally built on level ground, occasionally singly but more frequently 
concentrated in groups; a notable concentration of beehive tombs is to be 
found at Bat (Fig. 8.18). 138 Each tomb is probably a communal burialplace, 
most likely for a clan or extended family group and was probably used over 
a quite considerable period of time, representing the burials of several 
generations. They are themselves monuments of Oman's prosperity in the 
early third millennium for even as communal graves they must have 
represented a substantial expenditure of material and effort. 

The tombs must have been remarkably conspicuous monuments for they 
were cased in fine white limestone blocks, skilfully shaped and fitted to the 
contours of their beehive form. So far none has been found intact and all 
were plundered in antiquity. 

The second type of tomb of this period is again most distinctive: a cairn of 
stones, often standing up to 6 metres (20 feet) and more in height. 139 These 
are often to be found on ridges built evidently with the deliberate intention 
of setting them against the skyline and, perhaps, of providing their owners 

254 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 




Figure 8. 18 Omani tombs of the mid- to late third millennium have a distinctive 
'beehive' shape. They are well constructed and were finished with a 'skin' of finely 

shaped limestone blocks. 

with an agreeable view (Fig. 8.20). In this they may be reminiscent of Egyptian 
'houses of millions of years'. 

It may be assumed that both of these tomb types, which each represent 
such a substantial investment in labour and materials, were the sepulchres of 
the more prosperous citizens of ancient Oman. From the quantity, it may be 
inferred that the population of northern Oman in the third and early second 
millennia, was, like Bahrain in the same period and for this same reason, 
relatively substantial, a community certainly to be reckoned in thousands of 
inhabitants. The poor, it may be assumed, were not laid to rest in these 
handsome monuments but were buried simply in the eternally receptive 
desert. 

But there was even earlier communal activity in Oman which has left its 
traces in the archaeological record. At Ras al-Hamra, not far from the capital 
Muscat and close to Qurum, evidence of very early groups of fishermen has 
been found. 140 On the several promontories which mark the coastline of this 
part of Oman, burials have been found of fishermen dating back as early as 
the sixth millennium BC. 

At this time conditions were evidently very primitive; the communities 
would have presented a distinctly savage appearance. Their graves, however, 
are well formed and the occupants were laid in them with some ritual. 



255 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




Figure 8.19 Three typical cairns on an escarpment in northern Oman, built from 

local flint. 



Ornaments and weapons have been found as well as the evidence of animal 
(particularly turtle) sacrifices. 

The Ras al-Hamra communities flourished before the invention of pottery. 
Their existence, though long lasting, for they continued to fish Omani waters 
down to the end of the fourth millennium, must have been sparse indeed. 
Also on the coast, to the south of Muscat, traces have been found which 
suggest the presence of Harappan voyagers or at least of a people who were 
sufficiently in touch with the Indus Valley people to have acquired their 
pottery. 141 

In common with what seems to have been the situation in much of the 
rest of the Gulf, Oman appears to have experienced a decline in activity 
and in the evidence of such substantial and prosperous communities after 
the beginning of the second millennium; the possible reasons for this 



256 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 







Figure 8.20 A finely built Umm an-Nar tomb excavated at Bat, near Ibri, third 

millennium BC. 



phenomenon have been outlined earlier. In the case of Oman it must not 
be thought that so large a country, well endowed with water and fertile 
soil, was abandoned totally; this is most unlikely but the changed economic 
circumstances of the Gulf did not support large urban populations. In the 
case of the upper Gulf towns, whilst those in Bahrain and the mainland 
were probably never actually abandoned, their populations fell to a low 
level, to be represented perhaps by the equivalent of squatters, with an 
occasional military force garrisoned there. The situation generally is 
obscure. In Oman it is likely that the population reverted to a closer 
relationship with the land, living in villages or even in mobile communities 
which have left few identifiable traces behind them. It is to be hoped that 
more intensive exploration will reveal what evidence there may be of 



257 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

occupation during most of the second millennium and much of the first: 
so far, there is little to go on. 

It is significant that Alexander the Great's advisers evidently knew nothing 
of Oman when he was seeking information about the peoples of Arabia as 
he contemplated its conquest in the last months of his life. Although he 
had endured the appalling rigours of the march through the Gedrosian 
desert on the coast opposite Oman, it is evident that he knew nothing of 
what conditions were like on the western shore. This suggests strongly that 
after its earlier prosperity the downturn in the commercial and trading 
activity of the Gulf had resulted in the onset of barbarism in southeastern 
Arabia and the towns which had grown up to serve those who searched for 
Oman's copper fell into decay and into the oblivion from which they are 
only now being recalled. 

Prosperity once again returned to Oman when the extreme south of the 
country, the region which is now called Dhofar, came into prominence as 
one of the principal sources of supply of aromatics and spices, and, in 
particular, of frankincense. Expeditions had been sent out from Egypt at 
least as early as the third millennium in search of incense. Such expeditions 
sailed down the Red Sea to the land of Punt, sometimes also called the Land 
of the God in the Egyptian inscriptions which record the journeys. The 
Egyptians burned large quantities of aromatics in their religious and state 
ceremonies. A famous relief in the funerary temple of Hasheshowi (or 
Hatshepsut) at Deir al-Bahari shows an expedition setting out for Punt and, 
later, returning with Punt's dwarfish, stout and steatopygous Queen, a visitor 
of State, if of improbable proportions, to the equally formidable, though 
evidently more elegant, Egyptian Queen. 

Mesopotamia's comparative lack of interest in incense evidently meant 
that the sources of supply in south-eastern Arabia and in Oman were not 
exploited by the powers in Mesopotamia; there is as yet no evidence that the 
Egyptians ever went there themselves. It is possible that they acquired their 
supplies from middlemen, for the Egyptians themselves do not seem 
particularly to have honoured the calling of merchant. However, the growth 
of European powers such as Greece and later Rome, appearing for the first 
time on any real scale in the later first millennium, brought about an enormous 
increase in demand and, in consequence, the need to find permanent and 
reliable sources of supply. 

The quantities of incense which Greece, Rome and the post- Alexandrian 
kingdoms consumed were prodigious. The altars of all the gods were 
perpetually wreathed in it; emperors and city corporations alike would seek 
to honour their chosen divinity by the consumption of yet greater amounts 
of costly fragrances. Thus Alexander himself, in his own lifetime renowned 
for his piety and the service of the gods, was never sparing in his observances. 
When, as a young prince, he was reproved for wasting incense by his first 
tutor, he stored the memory in his mind and when he had conquered the 

258 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

world sent him a large quantity of incense, of near-incalculable value, warning 
him not to be parsimonious in paying honour to the gods. 

The cult of luxury in Rome and in the post- Alexandrian world added still 
further to the demand for Arabian aroma tics. By their use as perfumes and 
unguents, the wealthier citizens, whose nostrils might be expected to be 
sensitive, could make living bearable in a teeming, malodorous city like 
Rome. 

All of this meant an unparalleled prosperity for Arabia, the surest and most 
accessible source for the aromatics which these cults and customs demanded. 
Soon, kingdoms grew up in southern Arabia whose sole reason for existence 
was the cultivation, marketing and distribution of frankincense. Caravans, 
powered by the camel, which now came into its own for the first time (though 
introduced into the desert as early as the late fourth millen- nium, even if it 
probably was not domesticated), began to move up and down both littorals of 
Arabia, along the Red Sea coasts and up the Gulf shores. 142 

At points along the route duties levied on the camel trains and the provision 
of food and services for the master of the caravan and his men led to the 
creation of permanent communities which lived almost exclusively on this 
trade; from these caravanserai developed the great trading cities of Arabia. 
Those in the west, like Makkah, were later to exercise a still more stupendous 
role in world history when they witnessed the birth of Islam in the seventh 
century of the present era. 

Soon the riches of Arabia entered into the mythology of Europe, never 
wholly to be forgotten. 'Fortunate Arabia' — Arabia Felix' — counted its 
wealth in the resins which were tapped from the trees, on which, it could for 
once be truly said, their fortunes grew. As the rumours of Arabia's limitless 
wealth circulated in the political centres of the world (fuelled, no doubt, by 
the sumptuous apparel and rich retinues of its princes and merchants, who 
began to become familiar figures in Mediterranean cities), so European 
ambitions, notably those of the Roman Republic and its successor Empire, 
began to focus on Arabia, with the object of controlling if not subsuming the 
kingdoms which seemingly contained so much of the world's wealth. The 
parallel with circumstances today is irresistible; then as now, Arabia's wealth 
was based essentially on a one-product economy and one which was virtually 
unique in quantity and accessibility. Then, as now, Arabia's resources were 
the envy of the world and the target of the acquisitiveness of the powers. 
Oman enjoyed great wealth at this period and cities like Sumharam (Khor 
Rori) in Dhofar were extensive in size and very rich. 

There is another survival from the remote past in which Oman is 
exceptionally rich — rock carvings. In this too her heritage is different 
from that of her Gulf neighbours, for in general eastern Arabia has little 
to show of the practice of carving on rocks, though it is one which is 
found throughout the north and west of the peninsula from very early 
Neolithic times (Fig. 8.21). 143 

259 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




Figure 8.21 Rock carving in Oman. 

The distribution of rock carvings in Arabia and beyond is interesting and 
suggestive. Oman represents the most easterly manifestation of the 
phenomenon; to the west they run into the south-western desert regions of 
Saudi Arabia and up the Red Sea coastal areas, in some cases penetrating 
quite far inland. They appear in great quantity in the wadi systems of the 
Egyptian eastern desert. In different forms, rock drawings are to be found 
still further to the west in the Sahara and to the east in Iran. Some of the 
themes seem to be common to several of the regions, though they are 
separated by great distances. 

Winkler, who first attempted a scientific analysis of rock carvings, using 
those in the Wadi Hammamat in Egypt, tried to apply a chronology to the 
drawings he examined. 144 In this he was followed, though cautiously, by 
Anati, 145 who has analysed and published many examples from the southwest 
Arabian repertory. They both believed they could detect various styles of 
drawings which, from internal evidence of the dress, weapons and manners 
depicted, together with the recurrence of iconographic elements familiar 
from other contexts, made it possible to ascribe a time-scale to them. Any 
such attempt at applying a chronology was necessarily broadly generalized, 
and depended much upon the establishment of sequences of styles for the 
different groups of drawings. 

Any attempt to date rock carvings absolutely is fraught with difficulty. 
Only the palimpsest, provided it is interpreted correctly, can allow the 



260 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

presumption to be made that a drawing imposed on top of another is younger 
than the drawing which it overlies. The patination of the rock on which the 
drawings lie was once thought to be a reliable indicator of age; this is no 
longer so, for a prevailing wind constantly dusting a rock surface with sand 
particles can build up the most convincingly ancient-looking patination 
relatively quickly. 

In Oman the problem is further complicated by the fact that some of the 
desert people have continued the practice of engraving on rocks into very 
recent years . 146 Thus one case showed a replica of a drawing of an embracing 
couple, known from the Hili tombs of early third millennium BC; the replica 
appeared in Oman in a context which made it clear that it was of very recent 
date. Such is the persistence of certain themes in folk art the world over. 

Great horned beasts make frequent appearances in the drawings; some of 
them are of considerable size. Felines, mountain lion or leopard perhaps, 




Figure 8.22 The enigmatic carvings on the face of 'Colman's Rock' have puzzled all 
those who have examined them. They appear to he ancient and have been attributed 
to the Bronze Age. The figures, carved in high relief, are somewhat larger than life- 
size. South of Jebel el Abri, near Al-Hamra (Bahla). 



261 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

both of which were native to Oman in the past, are also depicted; in one 
dramatic scene a huge feline is depicted in the act of devouring a little man. 
One handsome carving seems to show a warrior with a high-crowned helm 
or a feather in his hair very similar to a style known from Iran. One of the 
most remarkable groups to be found in Oman is at Colman's Rock, in the 
interior south of Jebel el Abri (Fig. 8.22). On the rock, a large boulder in fact, 
are carved, expertly and in relief, four great figures, the largest of which is 
more than 2 metres tall. One of the figures, the central one of a group of 
three, wears a flat cap and has distinctly Caucasian features; at his side stands 
a huge negroid figure. 147 

This enigmatic group is quite without precedent, as is the manner of their 
representation, fine relief carving not being among the usual techniques of 
rock artists, in Oman or anywhere else in Arabia, except of course in Hili. It 
is conceivable that the figures on Colman's Rock may bear some relationship 
to the Hili carvings, though it would be difficult to be more specific at this 
juncture. 

The horse appears in a number of carvings, including spirited combat 
scenes where warriors brandish their little swords perpetually. These are 
sometimes associated with inscriptions in pre-Islamic south Arabian scripts, 
which allows them to be dated approximately to the first century of the 
Christian era. As would be expected, the horse is a relatively late arrival in 
this part of Arabia. Many are the representations of camels, from around 
2,000 years ago, by which time they had become a familiar part of the 
economy. 

The siting of the carvings is often very remarkable. Naturally many are 
found in rock shelters, under rocky overhangs and in places generally of 
reasonably easy access. Some, however, are engraved high on the face of 
wadi cliffs, prompting the speculation as to how the artists worked in such 
difficult locations. They recall, in terms of the difficulties which they must 
have imposed on the artist, some of the more inaccessible places chosen by 
the cave artists of European Palaeolithic times 10,000 years or more before 
the Omani examples. 

The archaeology of Oman is potentially very rich. Settlements in the 
country are long established and it may well hold at least one or two of the 
keys to the fuller understanding of the Gulf region in antiquity. Some 
historians of the earlier part of this century speculated that the Sumerians 
themselves originated in Oman: the preoccupation in the art of the people 
of the Land of the Two Rivers with mountains suggests that their origins lay 
in a mountainous land and Oman seems a fair candidate. There is no 
evidence yet to support the idea but enough has been said about the possible 
southern origins of the Sumerians not to dismiss absolutely any reasonable 
guess about their original home. 

However, it must be said that the Sumerians seem to have known from 
very early on that Oman was very rich in copper. If it had also been their 

262 



DILMUN'S NEIGHBOURING LANDS 

original home, or close to it, they surely would have remembered it from this 
fact alone. How else would they have known of the existence of copper 
there, at least by the end of the fourth millennium? It may be that the years 
ahead will answer this question, as the years past have answered so many 
others. 

Most of the communities which lived on the western side of the Gulf were 
concerned, one way or another, with the development, management or supply 
of Dilmun's trade, the staple of which was the mining and conversion of 
copper. The gods now began to fade from this narrative, to be replaced, for 
the moment, by the businessmen of Dilmun and of Sumer, exploring the 
world's markets and seeking new contacts, all in the hope of earning an 
honest mina. 



263 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 



During the time of Sumer's greatness and the prosperity which its successor 
states maintained, life went on busily in the cities, despite the sombre, 
occasional courts-in-death of the kings or their surrogates, the instability of 
the prevailing political system and the perennial threats of invasion and 
unrest. But as the Sumerians were essentially a down-to-earth people, much 
of their life consisted of concentrating on the simple process of making a 
living. The profit motive was strong in Sumer and its pursuit was more 
agreeable and the play of market forces was certainly more dear to the 
average Urite, for example, than the pursuit of an uncertain immortality by 
dead courtiers or the pretensions and schemes of aggrandizement of little 
princes. 

Most of the earliest city-states of Sumer were concentrated near the 
confluence of the two great rivers on which the black-headed people's 
civilization depended, the Tigris and the Euphrates. It was natural, 
especially if the legends of their origins were based upon any sort of 
recollected reality, that they should explore the sea routes to the south, 
down through the Gulf, the Lower Sea, and out into limitless ocean, which 
they believed, reasonably enough at the time, circled the world. Very 
soon the Sumerians became considerable, though sometimes rather 
apprehensive, seamen; they constitute, indeed, the first great maritime 
trading nation in the world's history. The boats which they sailed were 
probably not greatly different from the present day bourn (often 
erroneously called a dhow) and the high-prowed tarafa of the Marsh 
Arabs. 

Trade and legend are inextricably mixed in Sumer's history. Dilmun 
stands at the centre of both, just as the Bahrain islands occupied a 
conveniently central position between Mesopotamia, the Arabian coast, 
Oman (the source of much of Sumer's copper and stone) and the markets 
of the Indus Valley. 

For many centuries Bahrain-Dilmun provided the natural entrepot and 
distribution centre for the trans-shipment of the raw materials vital to Sumer's 
economy. Like the Vikings of a later age, the princes of Sumer were merchants 

264 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 



on a lavish scale and the most substantial records of Dilmun come from the 
trading activities of the little states, particularly from the city of Ur. 



TRADE 

Trade became possible when man had learned to exploit nature and to 
produce beyond his immediate needs. The surplus he thus created he could 
exchange with other peoples, taking from them their surplus in turn. 

The exchange of artefacts, which clearly began very early, probably arose 
out of simple admiration, an admiration which could not be satisfied merely 
by clubbing the owner of the object admired. Sophisticated techniques of 
warehousing, distribution, banking, a system of exchange based on value- 
based rates and commodities, and all the other facets of a complex economic 
system, were developed over the period from the middle of the fourth to the 
middle of the third millennias, as the result of the recognition of a need in 
each case and of a reasoned response to it. The dialogue, often as acrimonious 
as in our own day, between the needs of the state and those of the private 
sector of the economy began very early on, and complaints against the level 
of taxation and the incursions of central government into the affairs of 
commerce can be heard rising clearly above the chatter of the most ancient 
of market-places. 

Great cities rose and fell because of economic factors and their attendant 
political responses. In the documents which survive from Mesopotamia a 
significant proportion are commercial records of one sort or another, bills, 
memoranda and even dunning letters from anxious creditors seeking the 
repayment of a debt. 

In the trade of the ancient Near East, certainly in its earliest centuries 
when the great civilizations of Mesopotamia were widening the range of 
their influence and contacts, the Gulf, and particularly the islands and Oman, 
had an important part to play in the most vital trade route by sea of the day, 
that which went south and eastward from Mesopotamia to India. At the time 
when the Gilgamesh legend was written down in something like the form 
that has reached us, a millennium or more after the actual reported voyage 
of Gilgamesh to Dilmun, it is a thriving and important entrepot, with its kings 
recognized throughout the region as powerful merchant princes. Dilmun is 
no longer simply the faeryland of Sumerian legend but a place of trading 
ships and thronged harbours, its storehouses stacked with the wealth of the 
states on whose trade routes it was so strategically placed. 

Trade routes were of immense antiquity and well travelled, both those 
which extended over land and, later, the sea routes. Along the principal 
routes was strung a chain of trading posts and one of the most frequently 
repeated claims of a reforming monarch was that under his rule merchants 
could travel securely and speedily over the great distances, provisioned by 

265 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

caravanserai at regular stages and protected by imperial agents along the 
"way. 

The mechanics of ancient trade took as many forms as its modern 
counterpart today. In some cases, as we know from the documentary evidence, 
merchants would base themselves abroad, far from their homes. From this 
distant posting, living in small colonies, they would maintain contact with 
their headquarters and manage the acquisition, exchange or distribution of 
products with the communities amongst which they had established 
themselves. Artefacts themselves, of course, sometimes travelled far further 
than even the most dauntless merchant reached. A fine vessel, a piece of 
jewellery or a weapon might be handed on across an immense distance and 
pass through the hands of many different intermediaries. 



THE MECHANISMS OF ANCIENT COMMERCE 

For the Sumerians trade was inextricably linked with every phase of their lives. 
By harnessing the waters of the two great rivers on which their prosperity and 
even their lives depended, they created abundance; by planning their year 
carefully in relation to the rivers' inundations they created leisure in which to 
develop crafts and technical skills of a very high order. Because Sumer was a 
land barren of trees and of minerals these resources, essential for the well- 
being of the land and its ambitious and intensely creative people, could only 
be obtained from outside their own frontiers. The abundant fertility of their 
crops and herds gave them scope to trade their surplus for their other needs. 

From very early times the Sumerians had established a flourishing import- 
export economy, at first directed by the temples, later by the secular authorities 
and merchants operating on their own account. 1 As the cities grew, they 
became important trading points for the caravans which came up out of the 
plateaux of Iran. The early cities of Iran straddled the overland routes for 
many of the most sought-after raw materials of the fourth and third millennia, 
such as chlorite (steatite) and lapis lazuli. It has indeed been postulated that 
these cities, some of which were considerable in scale and extensive in 
influence, came into being simply in response to the demands of trade and 
the search for raw materials (Map 5). 2 

The great highway of Sumerian and later, of Akkadian and Old Babylonian 
trade, however, ran north-south. The two rivers themselves were the most 
expeditious and direct means for trade to flow from the Gulf, up through 
Sumer proper, onwards towards the Mediterranean into what was to become 
Assyria, travelling further north still, into Anatolia and to the west across 
the Upper Sea, possibly as far as distant Cyprus. As will be seen later, one 
of the most important items of trade was copper, both in the form 
of ingot and converted into manufactured products. The Euphrates' 
part in moving this trade may be commemorated by the fact that its 

266 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 




— 

a 

c 

u 

u 

— 
- 



u 
J3 



3 


I! 
- 

H 
It, 



267 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Sumerian name was Urudu, 'the copper river'; the Tigris, on the other hand, 
a swift-flowing stream, was appropriately named Idiglat, 'the arrow'. The 
various cities on the river routes also became the principal system for the 
distribution of manufactured goods and for interurban trade. 

The excavation of the mound at Tel Mardikh in Syria, the location of the 
city of Ebla, produced evidence of the extent of Dilmun's trade, as early as 
the mid-third millennium. 3 The importance of the Ebla site, apart from revealing 
it as the capital of a large and complex kingdom which maintained relations 
with other states on an international scale and which controlled a substantial 
area of Syria and upper Mesopotamia, lay in the rich caches of cuneiform 
tablets, written in an early Semitic language, that were excavated in profusion. 

From these tablets, whose translation is still proceeding, many references 
to the Dilmun trade have been identified. 4 Even by around 2500 BC tin was 
recorded as being brought from Dilmun. A considerable number of goods 
and products seems to have been identified with the term 'Dilmun — ' followed 
by the word for the product. This suggests that, even as early as this, Dilmun 
represented some sort of criterion of quality or was a synonym for excellence. 
'Harps' (in Eblaitic, ber-lag) 'beer-bread' (bappir), 'date-palm' (gis), tin (nagga) 
and copper (urudu) all are recorded in this way. 5 

It is clear from this list that Dilmun was regarded as an important commercial 
centre even in distant Ebla. It makes another appearance, in a list of 
geographical locations, where it is named amongst some of the most famous 
of Sumerian cities. These are Uruk, Lagash, Nippur, Adab, Shurupak, Umma, 
Elam and Dilmun. There is then a break (the translator believes that three 
place-names are missing) and the list ends with a repeated sign which he 
suggests may represent Egypt. 6 

The list of toponyms is particularly interesting. Uruk was the city of 
Gilgamesh, who sought his deified ancestor Ziusudra, King of Shurupak, in 
a place which can only have been the Dilmun of myth. Lagash was the state 
whose ruler, Ur-Nanshe, boasted that the ships of Dilmun unloaded their 
merchandise at his quays. Nippur and Umma were sacred centres, of great 
antiquity, with a reputation for sanctity comparable with Dilmun's. Elam, 
like Dilmun itself, is out of place with the others for both were countries or 
specific regions rather than city-states. 

It is an intriguing reference because it indicates that Dilmun must have 
been recognized as being of considerable importance, even before the 
migration of its centre to the Bahrain islands. At the time of the Ebla texts it 
must be presumed that Dilmun was still located in eastern Arabia. However, 
as yet no early or mid-third-millennium site of sufficient size and status has 
been identifed which would be convincing as the centre of a state worthy to 
be ranked with some of the most prestigious of Sumerian cities. 

Further evidence of Dilmun's status, at least as far as the merchants of 
Ebla were concerned, is revealed by references to a 'Dilmun-shekeP. This 
appears to have been a unit of weight which was accepted as being comparable 

268 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 



with Ebla's own units of measurement, a tribute presumably to the standing 
of the merchants of Dilmun, though they came from far away. 7 



DILMUN: ENTREPOT OF THE GULF 

From the marshlands where the Tigris and Euphrates debouch into the Gulf 
another route lay open to the enterprising Sumerian merchant, south to Arabia 
and away to the east, to the rich and powerful cities of the Indus Valley, 
Moenjo-Daro and Harappa. On this route, Dilmun occupied a crucial position, 
lying some 480 kilometres (300 miles) from the head of the Gulf, and the 
only safe harbourage in what was often a dangerous and unpredictable sea. 
By the middle of the third millennium Sumerian rulers are to be found dealing 
directly with Dilmun. Ur-Nanshe, king of Lagash c. 2520 BC, records the fact 
that, in his reign, ships of Dilmun brought tribute to him, in what is otherwise 
a catalogue of the temples that he built for the honour of the gods of Sumer. 
The inscription is from a door socket dedicated by the king: 

Ur-Nanshe, the king of Lagash, the son of Gunidu, the son of Gurmu, 
built the house of Ningirsu: built the house of Nanshe: built the house 
of Gatumdug: built the harem: built the house of Ninmar. The ships of 
Dilmun brought him wood as a tribute from foreign lands. He built the 
Ibqal: built the Kinir: built the sceptre-house. 8 

Thus, as early as the first recorded kings of Lagash, at the time when the 
pyramids in Egypt were sparkling new, Sumer was actively promoting an 
extensive trade with Dilmun. The king and queen of Lagash (if such titles 
may be used, however anachronistically) were directly involved and in 
exchange for Dilmun's copper and splendid dates they offered barley, cedar, 
oil, flour, dresses and silver. 

Records of the shipment of dates and onions, both specialities of Dilmun, 
again occur in the reign of Ur-Nanshe. The wife of Lugalanda, another ruler 
of Lagash, exported wheat, cedarwood, cheese and shelled barley to the 
island: '234 mina of copper ore; copper ore, property of Luqunntu (wife of 
Lugalanda) which Ur-Enki the merchant has brought from the mountain of 
Dilmun, Lugalanda, Ensi of Lagash, has paid for in the palace.' 9 Copper from 
Dilmun was called, in the Sumerian language, urudu NiTutt 1 ' . Ur-Enki, whose 
name is compounded with that of Enki, the benign god, is one of the earliest 
merchants to be known by name; it is interesting that by his time the temporal 
power, in the person of the sovereign's wife (or, more accurately, one of the 
sovereign's several wives), was engaging in trade, rather than its being the 
province of the temple authorities, which is generally thought to have been 
the case in Early Dynastic times. The wives of rulers also engaged, like their 
husbands, in the fish trade. 10 

269 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

The records of Lagash in Sumerian times reveal something of the mechanics 
of trade in the city-states, before the merchants had achieved fully independent 
status. The ruler evidently provided goods from some sort of central 
warehousing system to the merchants, enabling them to trade (in this case, 
with Dilmun) and to exchange Lagash merchandise for Dilmun's products. 

Presumably the merchants were working on a basis of commission 
payments. Ur-Enki operated on quite a large scale: he is recorded as having 
moved something like 100 kilograms of copper in one shipment from Dilmun. 
'From the central warehouses Shubur, the Inspector, gave him a quantity of 
cedarwood, grain and flour for exchange in Dilmun. This was in the fifth 
year of the rule of Lugalanda.' 11 

Lugalanda was evidently favoured with at least two commercially minded 
wives. Apart from Luqunntu we are told that 'Barrambara, wife of Lugalanda, 
counted out copper to the merchant Dugilam, to take to the city of Umma 
and exchange for silver.' 12 

It may be inferred by various objects, including the distinctive Barbar 
ware pottery found in Sumerian sites, that Dilmun early on had its own 
export industry, probably originating at the time of the Sumerians' first 
accession to supremacy in the land, towards the later centuries of the fourth 
millennium. The earliest textual reference to Dilmun, as we have seen, comes 
from this time and refers to trade. 



THE INDUS VALLEY 

The Indus Valley cities spread north-west in a chain along the banks of their 
great river. There is little early evidence at present of developed cultures 
having flourished in the region, most of which is now contained within 
modern Pakistan, at the time of the foundation of the Sumerian cities. However, 
as many of the early levels of the Indus cities are hopelessly waterlogged, 
caution must be expressed about this view. The sites of the Indus cities are 
impressive and suggest a considerable awareness of the importance of town 
planning; most of them are designed on a formal pattern with a preponderance 
of large public buildings and wide, regular streets. Indus Valley architecture 
tends to be monolithic, lacking in relief or features, and their cities must 
have been oppressive places to live in. 

The people of the Indus cities had developed a pictographic script, evolved 
seemingly to a relatively high degree and apparently demonstrating, for 
example, the understanding and use of accent markings. It occurs on the 
pottery of the region and on their characteristic square stamp seals, of which 
many examples survive. 13 It is still generally considered to be undeciphered. 

At the height of the Indus Valley civilization, about a hundred cities made 
up what was, to a large extent, a centrally organized state. The two cities of 
Harappa and Moenjo-Daro were much the largest and, it has been suggested, 

270 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 

may have been twin capitals of a large and monolithic state. Throughout the 
Indus Valley there are hints of Mesopotamian, even of Sumerian, associations, 
but these are too slight to suggest a profound and continuing influence of 
what is probably the older civilization on the younger. There is, however, 
little doubt that the Indus Valley people, whoever they were, drew some of 
their initial inspiration from Mesopotamia. Beyond that fact, contact was 
maintained between them principally byway of trade through Bahrain-Dilmun 
and the Gulf, particularly in the early days through Oman. 

The little of Indus Valley art that survives suggests the presence of Sumerian 
influences. The so-far-unique carved stone bust of a 'priest-king' or divinity 
from Moenjo-Daro could be a provincial, orientalized Sumerian work. 14 Pottery 
figures of divinities display the pinched, almost reptilian faces of their much 
earlier Mesopotamian colleagues, with similar rather bizarre ideas about the 
head-dress proper for a god. 

Kidney-shaped beads found in Dilmun may have their origins in the Indus 
Valley and there is little doubt that the ivory which was so important a part of 
Dilmun's trade with the Sumerian cities came from there. A little ivory figurine, 
unhappily only a fragment, found by Mackay in one of the tumuli in the 
desert near Aali, 15 is reminiscent, no more, of one of the most celebrated 
pieces from Moenjo-Daro, which in its elegance and mastery of form is quite 
uncharacteristic of the little that we know of the Indus people's art. This is a 
little bronze dancer, pert and nude, full of charm; 16 comparable with it, if 
suspect as far as the relatively early period to which it has been ascribed is 
concerned, is the torso of a youth, whose impressively developed genitals 
and general chubbiness may lack appeal to those accustomed to judge such 
figures by the more slender charm of a kouros. 17 

Indus Valley pottery has been found in the Arabian Gulf at Abu Dhabi, at 
the oasis of Buraimi and, arguably in that the Indus provenance is disputed, 
on the island of Umm an-Nar. 18 However, the evidence in Bahrain itself is 
reasonably conclusive, and, prima facie, there is no reason why other points 
on the coast of the Gulf should not have been visited by traders journeying 
to or from the Indus Valley. Harappan material has also been identified on 
the Omani coast at Ras al-Hamra, not far from Muscat. 19 



THE ROLE OF THE MERCHANT 

Documents from the very ancient and holy city of Shurrupak, once ruled by 
Ziusudra, show that the dealers and sailors engaged in the trade were known 
as gal-Dilmun. 20 This compares with the Old Babylonian term Alik Tilmun 
which described the guild which represented the merchants who traded 
with Dilmun in the early second millennium. 

The land routes from Sumer to the Indus ran through Persia and were 
long and dangerous, beset with rapacious and deplorably uncommercial 

271 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

tribes. The sea route was to be preferred, therefore, and it was because of 
this that in the third and early second millennia Dilmun, the sacred island, 
assumed another, more mundane role as the great emporium of trade between 
east and west. Equally important, it was well placed between the southern, 
richly endowed but primitive lands and the northern states, hungry for the 
raw materials and for copper, stone, ivory and gold, which were needed for 
their rich, consumer-orientated economies. 

In pre-Sargonid times trade was largely the perquisite of the temple 
administrations even when it was conducted in the ruler's name, a logical 
enough practice since, technically at least, all land and goods belonged to 
the god of the city and the authorities, the governors and priests, merely 
administrated them on the god's behalf. Thus it was the practice for the 
temples to fit out trading expeditions, hiring sea-captains and a class of 
merchant who specialized in the brokerage of the temple-financed trade. 
Apart from the merchant's payment, the profits went to the temples and they 
grew exceedingly rich. 

Later, however, as a result of an as yet unknown change in the Sumerian 
social system, individual merchants appear, trading on their own behalf or as 
members of privately financed syndicates. It may well be that the merchants 
who had traded in the temples' interest grew rich and, over generations, saw 
the prospect of even more substantial profits as a motive still more compelling 
than the favour of the gods, whose payment of dividends was likely, in the 
Sumerian view of things, to be long deferred if, indeed, forthcoming at all. 
During the time when free enterprise flourished, however, the palace and 
sometimes certain of the temples levied a duty on imports, particularly on 
the all-important copper trade. 

In the first year of the reign of King Ibbi-Sin of Ur (c. 2029-2006 BC) a sea 
captain, Ur-Gur, who commanded a large boat and thought it worth recording 
the fact, shipped 10 talents' worth of wool of ordinary quality' to Dilmun. 
There is some evidence that he was acting under the aegis of one of the 
temples in this transaction. 21 

Over a century later a woman, Amad-Ningal, in all probability a native of 
Ur, made an offering to the goddess Ningal from the proceeds of an expedition 
to Dilmun. 22 It is a matter of speculation whether she was making the offering, 
the customary tithe, on behalf of another or whether, as is equally possible, 
since women were at no disadvantage in Sumerian society (as witness 
Lugalanda's wives), she was trading in her own right. 

Trade did not only flow one way, directed from Sumer to the impressionable 
natives of Dilmun and other distant regions, for several unmistakably Dilmunite 
names in texts of the time make it clear that the islanders themselves also 
traded in Ur and other Sumerian cities. Thus from Larsa, at the end of the 
twentieth century BC, gifts to the temple of Ningal are recorded from one 
Idin-Nin-Inzak, the last part of whose name commemorates Dilmun's tutelary 
god. 23 Included amongst the merchandise listed in Idin-Nin-Inzak's inscription 

272 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 

are 'fish-eyes', almost certainly the pearls of Dilmun, the trade of which was 
of very high antiquity. Idin-Nin-Inzak was prosperous enough for gold, a 
comparatively rare product in Sumer, to figure amongst his benefactions to 
the temple of Ningal. 

Another inscription is a catalogue of the items found in the great burial 
tumuli of Bahrain: carnelian beads, rods of iron, copper and ivory combs, all 
recorded as the proceeds of an expedition to Dilmun. 24 

A Dilmunite, Iddin-ilum, appears making a tithe of silver whilst Dumudugga 
certifies the correctness of the amount. 25 The Dilmun merchants were 
prosperous and influential men; indeed, so considerable was their reputation 
that in Babylonian times lu-tilmun-a, 'the men of Dilmun', became a synonym 
for the profession of trader. The Sumerian term for merchant, incidentally, 
and itself of great antiquity, is dam-gar; it may be one of the supposed pre- 
Sumerian words taken into the language from some earlier stratum. 

One of the techniques of early trading, developed to aid the interchange 
of goods and contacts between distant peoples, was the establishment of 
merchant colonies in cities linked by mutual trading interests. This obviously 
was desirable amongst peoples who did not possess a common language 
(although Akkadian was employed for this purpose by the middle of the 
second millennium) and whose literacy was, to say the least, limited. Thus 
communities grew up whose function was to broke the argosies which plied 
to and from the land from which the settlers came. Sometimes they lived 
outside the city walls; often they were independent communities, governed 
by their own magistrates who were responsible for the general maintenance 
of order and the return of taxes to the central authority. Their rights were 
respected, but they were aliens, forming a sort of ghetto in the midst of a 
foreign city or living on its periphery. Seals found at Ur, obviously Indian in 
origin, demonstrate the existence of such communities in the Mesopotamian 
cities. 

The Sumerians, more than their successors the Babylonians and Assyrians, 
seem to have been by inclination a seafaring people, but their attitude to the 
sea and sailing was one of extreme caution and respect; in this way they 
were typical of most ancient peoples. Although in one mood they would 
salute the Gulf as the father of all oceans, in another they spoke of it as 'the 
fearful sea'. They were forced on to the sea to gain additional and, because 
they were far distant, more lucrative markets for their exports. The fact that 
the waters of the Gulf flow in a counter-clockwise motion (see Chapter 3) 
would have assisted the development of sailing. The merchant ships would 
have set out from the head of the Gulf holding to the west shore and being 
driven south by the counter-flow. On their return they would have lugged 
along the coast of what is now Iran with the Gulf's flow carrying them home. 

They were more confident of their merchanting ability than of their 
seamanship: many ex-votos survive proclaiming the gratitude of these nervous 
merchant venturers to the gods who have ensured their safe return from the 

273 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

perils of ocean. Ningal was the recipient of most of the offerings of Urite 
seamen; she has been well described as a sort of Sumerian Notre Dame de la 
Garde. 26 The Mesopotamians were, however, far from being as alienated 
from the sea as some of their contemporaries. The Egyptians, the most 
conservative of all the ancients, regarded 'the Great Green' with positive 
distaste and considered the fact that Egypt was but little dependent on the 
sea for any of its wants as another singular mark of the favour of the gods 
who had, they felt, made Egypt as perfect a land as it was possible even for 
the gods to do. 

But the extent of the Dilmunite trade overland was equally formidable 
and is demonstrated by the appearance at the court of the king of Mari, a 
city on the Euphrates far to the north of Sumer in northern Syria, of 
messengers from the island in the eighteenth century BC. 27 That its 
emissaries could travel these distances, apparently independently, attests 
to the prosperity and influence of Dilmun at that time. The king of Assyria, 
Shamsi-Adad I (1814-1782 BC) commanded that the Dilmunites should 
be given gifts of oil, sesame, boxwood and sandals. The Assyrians sent a 
caravan to Dilmun, which on its return was directed to deliver its goods 
to Hammurabi of Babylon, who reigned from 1792 to 1750 BC. Before it 
reached the city, however, it seems to have met with difficulties on the 
way. 2K 

Hammurabi's successor as king of Babylon was Samsu-iluna, who reigned 
from 1749 to 1684 BC. In the twenty-first year of his reign traders from Dilmun 
are mentioned in a text from a provincial city, Legaba. 29 This document records 
the delivery of a quantity of barley, perhaps the property of a Dilmunite, 
Samas-Nasir, resident in the Babylonian kingdom, to two others, one of whom, 
Inzak-gamil, has a traditional Dilmunite compound in his name. 

Most ancient history is the record of the doings of kings and conquerors, 
figures who loom larger than life and whose shadows obscure the people 
whose lives went on despite them. But an engaging feature of the records of 
early Mesopotamia is that individuals play their part, private citizens who 
would be wholly recognizable today, mocking the grave significance which 
history gives to the events happening around them, like jesters chuckling 
sardonically at the feet of emperors. 



THE ARCHIVES OF TRADE 

The largest group of cuneiform tablets to have come down from the city 
mounds of Mesopotamia over these 4,000 years is unquestionably that which 
is concerned, in general terms, with trade. Many of them are contracts 
between one merchant and another, with captains of ships hired for specific 
voyages, and bills, notes of exchange, and even agreements over the 
financing of trading expeditions. These last are particularly interesting in 

274 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 

that they appear to describe the earliest examples of banking, whereby a 
financier would advance funds against a particular project at an agreed 
rate, the contract specifying, in the manner of bankers ever since, that the 
borrowers alone would be responsible for all losses. Hammurabi tried 
unsuccessfully to change this and make the banker equally liable. 30 That 
even he, one of the most powerful kings of antiquity, could not do so 
suggests that the legendary political power of bankers has deep historical 
roots. There is one particularly interesting document which appears to be 
a 'joint and several guarantee by a number of partners to the banker who 
had advanced them a loan. 

Credit makes its first helpful appearance in commercial history and is 
recognized as a factor in assessing how much money might reasonably be 
advanced to a trader. The Sumerian term tadmiqtu approximates to the concept 
of 'goodwill' as a factor in assessing the value of a business and thus in 
securing a loan. 31 A system of letters of credit enabled a merchant to operate 
at a distance far from his home base without the need for carrying large 
amounts of treasure with him, with all the risks attendant upon so doing. 
Relationships between one merchant firm and another in a foreign market 
were built up and enabled members of the firm to trade together to the 
advantage of both. Many firms existed for long periods, often for several 
generations. 

The idea of a currency standard first appears at the end of the third 
millennium, for values of goods are often expressed in terms of an equivalent 
in silver. Whilst the Sumerians used the silver standard, they did not go to 
the next stage and actually produce a currency for exchange, although 
they did possibly exchange discs or rings of standard weight silver for 
services or products; coinage had to wait for its invention until the seventh- 
century Lydians of Asia Minor. But its absence did not prevent the Sumerians 
from developing a highly sophisticated system of merchant banking by 
using the silver standard as an agreed basis on which loans or interest 
might be assessed. This was largely achieved by comparisons of weights. 
Silver was handled in bars, with official markings and a certification of 
weight. 

Dilmun seems to have been of sufficient importance as a trade centre 
around the beginning of the second millennium to have had its own 
measurement of weight, differing from that of the great commercial metropolis 
of the time, Ur. It appears that the Dilmun weight may have been of the same 
value as that used in the Indus Valley cities. 32 A set of weights found in the 
City II site at the Qala'at al-Bahrain is equivalent to the weights used in the 
Indus Valley cities and may be evidence of the actual presence of merchants 
from those cities in Dilmun. 33 



275 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

EA-NASIR, THE DILMUN MERCHANT 

In the reign of Rim-Sin (1822-1763 BC), one of the kings of the Elamite 
dynasty which ruled the kingdom of Isin-Larsa, there flourished in the city of 
Ur, for centuries one of the most important of the Sumerian trade centres, a 
member of the guild of Dilmun merchants whose name was Ea-Nasir. The 
guild, the Alik Tilmun as it came to be called in the Babylonian form, consisted 
of those merchants who, trading on their own behalf down the Gulf, based 
their trans-shipment business on Dilmun's prosperous and hospitable quays. 
By a fortunate chance an extensive correspondence, if it is sometimes anxious 
and acrimonious, between Ea-Nasir and his business associates survived in 
the ruins of his house in Ur, to which he had withdrawn in the hope of 
enjoying a prosperous retirement after his evidently not wholly scrupulous 
business career. 34 He was active in business around the turn of the nineteenth 
century BC. 

It is, incidentally, important to recognize that this particular trade, of which 
we have relatively detailed knowledge, was between Dilmun and Ur. There 
may well have been other merchants of the status of the Urites who dealt 
with Dilmun but nothing is known of their organization, if any such existed. 
Ea-Nasir was a substantial dealer in copper, a wholesaler of copper ingots; 
sometimes he dealt in finished products made from the metal and, indeed, in 
anything else from which he could see the chance of a profit. 

Amongst the mass of often tedious, but historically very important 
cuneiform commercial correspondence which survives inscribed on tablets 
of baked clay, Ea-Nasir's letters gleam mischievously, for much of what 
survives of his archives may be categorized as 'dunning tablets' from his 
creditors, often expressed in those terms of hurt surprise and reproach 
which would be familiar to many a debtor today. Ea-Nasir, the first part of 
whose name is the Semitic or Babylonian form of Enki, was obviously 
considered a reasonably good risk at the outset, judging by the amounts 
which he was advanced; the records credit him with substantial borrowings 
in copper. Evidently at the outset of his career he was acting for the 
palace, buying and selling on the king's behalf. But later there appears a 
series of sharp and sometimes rather petulant cries of financial anguish 
directed to him by his backers in Ur whilst he is away in Dilmun. The 
usual formal injunction 'Speak to. . .' precedes the text of most of the letters, 
indicating that in all probability neither the sender nor the recipient was 
literate. A letter, in fact, was known as a say to them' and was written and 
read by professional scribes who thus themselves became men of influence 
and power, privy as they were to all the commercial and political secrets 
of the time. 

Nanni is particularly hurt at Ea-Nasir's casual, even discourteous, 
attitude: after all, are not both of them gentlemen and surely they should 
behave as such? 

276 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 

Speak to Ea-Nasir; thus says Nanni. Now when you had come you 
spoke saying thus: I will give good ingots to Gimil-Sin' this you said to 
me when you had come, but you have not done it: you have offered 
bad ingots to my messenger, saying If you will take it, take it, if you 
will not take it, go away.' Who am I that you are treating me in this 
manner — treat me with such contempt? and that between gentlemen 
such as we are! I have written to you to receive my purse but you have 
neglected it — who is there among the Dilmun traders who has acted 
against me in this way? 35 

Sumerian and Babylonian businessmen frequently demonstrate a strong 
sense of their own gentility and deplore the absence of it in their 
correspondents. They were, in fact, right to do so. The status of 'gentleman' 
was defined at law, certainly in Hammurabi's time. It was, for example, 
considerably more expensive, in terms of the compensation which had 
to be paid, to wound a gentleman than it was to injure a commoner or a 
slave. 

In another letter Nanni seems to resent the fact that Ea-Nasir has removed 
a quantity of silver from his house and now 'you make this discussion'. 36 He 
is worried too that he and others have sworn as to the legality of the contract 
in the temple of Shamash. The sun-god was traditionally the witness of all 
such oaths, thus rendering them sacred, and he had a special care of merchants. 
In a hymn of praise to the god it is said of him, 'The merchant with his 
pouch, thou dost save from the flood.' Abituram follows, more concisely 
and with the threat that he will call in Ea-Nasir's mortgages; Abituram, wisely 
one feels, had actually pinned Ea-Nasir down in writing. Nigga-Nanna, the 
bearer of a name that it would be difficult to take seriously today no matter 
how much one might owe him, makes the first of his several appearances. 
'The silver and its profit give it to Nigga-Nanna... I have made you issue a 
tablet. Why have you not given the copper? If you do not give it, I will bring 
in your pledges. 37 

Exasperation dominates the opening of the next letter, still as curt in its 
address to Ea-Nasir as the others have been: 'Speak to Ea-Nasir: thus says 
Abituram. Why have you not given the copper to Nigga-Nanna?' He ends on 
a kinder note, but still with a plea for his copper: 'The work you have done 
is good.... The copper... give it to Nigga-Nanna.' 38 

The next is no doubt familiar to the modern reader, for it gives the 
impression of a weary banker dismissing a tiresome client: 

Speak to Ea-Nasir: thus says Imqui-Sin. May Shamash bless your life. 
Give good copper under seal to Nigga-Nanna. Now you have had one 
issue ten shekels of silver. In order that your heart shall not be troubled 
give good copper to him. Do you not know how tired I am? And when 
you arrive with Itsu-Rabi take it away and give it to Nigga-Nanna. 39 

277 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Nanni's place in the correspondence is now taken by Appa, who has the 
same sort of problem with Ea-Nasir and who also wants, slightly improbably, 
a copper kettle. 

Speak to Ea-Nasir: thus says Appa. The copper of mine, give it to Nigga- 
Nanna — good copper in order that my heart shall not be troubled. . .and 
one copper kettle which can hold 15 qa of water, and 10 minas of other 
copper send to me. I will pay silver for it. 40 

Ea-Nasir evidently has a partner, Ilsu-ellatsu, for one of the letters is 
addressed to them both. Another, a rather cagey one in which Ilsu-ellatsu 
seems to be worried that his partner will upset the client, is addressed by 
him to Ea-Nasir. 

Speak to Ea-Nasir: thus says Ilsu-ellatsu, with regard to the copper of 
Idin-Sin. Izija will come to you. Show him 15 ingots so that he may 
select 6 good ingots and give him these. Act in such a way that Idin-Sin 
will not become angry. 41 

It would be agreeable to think that in the end Ea-Nasir honoured all his 
commitments and lived happily ever after with the other financiers of Ur on 
the profits of the Dilmun copper trade. He appears again, this time in the 
garment business, a very profitable export line to Dilmun and one which it is 
difficult not to feel was particularly suited to the egregious Ea-Nasir. 

Unhappily, all may not have gone well with Ea-Nasir in the long run. 
According to Woolley, who excavated his house at Ur, part of it was 
incorporated into the house next door at the end of the Isin-Larsa period 
when Ea-Nasir lived and flourished hopefully. 42 In Ea-Nasir's private records, 
Woolley found evidence of a diversity of interests and a variety of commercial 
involvement to a degree which would impress a modern entrepreneur. Land 
speculation, real estate, usury and second-hand clothing were all, apparently, 
grist to Ea-Nasir's mill. 

His ambition, however, seems to have outrun his ability, at least in Woolley's 
view, and to have forced on this agile and adventurous merchant a significant 
reduction in his standard of living and in the size of his house. At this distance 
in time, it is probably merely sentimental to hope that part of Ea-Nasir's 
house was incorporated into his next-door neighbour's residence because 
his neighbour offered him a good price for it. 

It is to Woolley that we owe the location and layout of Ea-Nasir's house in 
Ur, at the time of Rim-Sin. Woolley was a splendid excavator and a perceptive 
archaeologist: he was also often idiosyncratic. When he published the results 
of his epoch-making researches at Ur, so much more remarkable than the 
findings of the burial of Tutankhamun in the same period (the 1920s), Woolley 
produced a clear and precisely drawn street plan of the city as it was in Ea- 

278 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 

Nasir's time. For some reason he chose to give the streets, or at least the 
principal ones, the names of the streets of Oxford where he had been an 
undergraduate (a contemporary of T.E.Lawrence) in the early years of the 
century. This produces some curious consequences: Ea-Nasir's address thus 
becomes 1 Old Street; after his house was combined with his neighbour's it 
became 7 Church Lane. It would be a courageous archaeologist today, 
incidentally, who would inscribe two lanes on his city plan as Gay Street and 
Straight Street respectively, 43 even if he had been at Oxford. 

It is easy to be amused by the bickerings and craftiness of these ancient 
businessmen whose attitudes, behaviour and even language are so totally 
those of their modern successors. Yet it must not be forgotten that to the 
immediate predecessors of Ea-Nasir and his companions, one of the supreme 
and most glorious achievements of the human race is due. 

As far back as the middle of the fourth millennium, trade in Sumer had 
achieved such proportions that those engaged in it required the means to 
record their sales and purchases and the stocks of goods and animals which 
they maintained. From the system which they developed, the earliest known 
examples of which are baked tablets from Gilgamesh's city of Uruk and from 
Kish, dated roughly 3500 BC, all writing, so far as we know, descends. From 
its earliest form, when it was little more than the association of symbols of 
quantity with the representation of the object concerned, writing quickly 
evolved to become a sophisticated and flexible instrument for recording not 
merely the number of sheep a temple possessed, but the aspirations, fears 
and delights of men. By the early centuries of the third millennium a formal 
literature already existed which culminated in the story of Gilgamesh's quest, 
perhaps the most moving and majestic of all the legends of antiquity; but it is 
wholly in character with the Sumerians that one of the earliest phonetically 
written words should be dam-gar, 'a merchant'. 

Ea-Nasir, the Dilmun merchant, was clearly more concerned with profit 
than with poetry. But he has his modest place in the line which runs from the 
archaic scribes of Uruk and Kish, through the spiky elegance of Sumerian 
cuneiform and all the written languages of the world to Virgil, Dante and 
Shakespeare. 

Agreeable though it is to associate Ea-Nasir and his colleagues with poets 
and poetry, it is only part of the story; arguably, it is not the most important 
contribution which such ancient commercial enterprises made to human 
progress and development. Before the creation of armies, a relatively late 
development, the social and cultural character of one land was most likely to 
be influenced by another through trade and the contacts and exchanges 
which it brought about. Merchants were, of necessity, travellers, by nature 
observant and keen to take advantage of any opportunity which might present 
itself. Finding a society less developed than that from which they themselves 
had come, they could introduce new ideas, new ways of doing things, even 
new beliefs and religious practices. This must have been especially true 

279 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

when there was something, metal perhaps or timber, that they wanted from 
a less sophisticated land. From those countries that had developed crafts, 
they brought goods which they had bartered, leaving behind the products of 
other lands which in turn exercised their influence and contributed to change 
and progress. 

From the earliest times this traffic had extended far across the known 
world. It is to the merchants, and probably in particular to the seafaring 
merchants, that much of the credit must go for the bringing of the arts of 
civilization to backward lands and not, as so many legends would have it, to 
gods such as Enki or, in Egypt, to the followers of Horns, unless they too 
combined business with divinity. 

Writing is one thing; the immediate, day-to-day responsibilities of running 
a business quite another. It is clear that few merchants were themselves 
literate: each firm would have had scribal staff members who were responsible 
for the archives and for the management of the firm's correspondence. The 
production of literary texts could be left to the temple scribes or to ladies of 
a literary turn of mind, like Sargon the Great's daughter who was a High 
Priestess in Uruk in the twenty-fourth century BC, and was given to occasional 
composition. 



SEALS AND SEALINGS 

For the ordinary affairs of the businesses on which so much of the prosperity 
of Sumer and Dilmun was founded, a technique other than the laborious, 
labour-intensive and no doubt costly process of scribal composition was 
devised: the practice of marking merchandise, documents or other movable 
property with the impression of a design cut into the face either of a cylinder 
or of a stamp seal. The latter form, the stamp seal, is one of the special glories 
of the Gulf cities. Its use made general literacy unnecessary for, whilst it 
might be difficult for a hard-pressed merchant or his assistants to decipher a 
written text, anyone could recognize a design, their own or another's, whose 
repetition would make it familiar very quickly. Before the various caches of 
Dilmun seals from Bahrain and other sites in the Gulf are described, it may 
be appropriate to consider more generally the purpose of seals in antiquity, 
for they are amongst the most enduring objects frequently to survive from 
these remote times. They are of special appeal to those who approach the 
ancient world from what is nowadays perhaps an outmoded and 
unfashionable humanistic standpoint, for they are highly personalized objects, 
most of them unique and hence attributable to a single ownership. 

Man has an interesting tendency to seek mechanical solutions to any 
problem that confronts him. In central Anatolia, at Catal Hiiyuk in the seventh 
and sixth millennia before the present era, he seems, remarkably enough, to 
have devised a method for the repeated impression of stylized designs by 

280 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 

means of baked clay stamp seals, with the design scored on the flat under- 
surface of the seal. 44 Because the designs which they reproduced were often 
regarded as sacred and celebrated the gods, the seals themselves may have 
served as amulets and thus transmitted the benefit of their protection to the 
wearer. There is, further, a strongly probable link between the use of seals, 
writing and urbanization. As man began to live in permanent communities, 
the idea of individual property evolved and with it the need to protect and to 
identify it. To meet these needs, first the seal and then writing itself were 
invented, with the use of 'tokens', whose extraordinarily long history has 
been demonstrated, as a stage preliminary to the development of scripts. 45 

The use of seals was to become one of the most characteristic practices of 
the peoples, particularly the traders, of the ancient Near East. Whether they 
originated in Anatolia it is not at present possible to assert positively but 
certainly none older are known. If they did first emerge there it seems that, 
although a dark night of oblivion descended on the Anatolian settlements 
which has only been lifted in the past generation, the practice spread from 
there, since some of the early forms and symbolisms seem to be preserved, 
travelling down into Syria, across to Mesopotamia and Iran and southwards 
to the Indus Valley; in time, each region developed a form or shape of seal 
peculiar to it, although, as will be seen later, many of the elements of their 
designs were common or were diffused from one culture to another. The 
excavator of the remarkable pre-literate, pre-urban cities' on the Anatolian 
plain proposed that the original use of the stamp seals found there was as a 
means of decorative tattooing on the body and, in what is surely the first 
glimmering of printing as a mechanical reproduction process, the imposition 
of designs on textiles. 46 This beginning of the practice of making seals may 
be dated to the seventh millennium BC. 

In the Gulf, the seals are the harbingers of capitalism; but they are also 
talismanic, powerful amulets which invoked the protection of a divinity over 
the goods which they marked, or even, since some have been found in 
positions which indicate that they were attached to their owners in their 
tombs, over the owner himself. 

Seals fall broadly into two types: 'stamp' seals, of which those from the 
Gulf are typical, and 'cylinder' seals of which the Akkadian, Old Babylonian 
and Assyrian empires in Mesopotamia were notable producers. Their purpose 
is the same, to identify property in a largely illiterate society; not, it should be 
noted, in specifically pre-literate societies, for the use of seals and the practice 
of writing frequently coexist. The method employed in the actual business 
of sealing differs in the two types of seal: in the case of the stamp seal a 
single 'print' of the seal is impressed in the clay either on the object to be 
identified, a pottery jar, inscribed tablet or a bulla which could be attached to 
the article concerned; the cylinder seal, by contrast, is rolled out and gives a 
continuous, repeated impression of the design by which its proprietorship is 
to be distinguished. 

281 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Stamp seals were the earlier of the two types to be invented; the cylinder 
seal is a product of the later fourth, early third millennium in Mesopotamia. 
One of the pieces of evidence which shows Mesopotamian influences in late 
Predynastic and Archaic Egypt (c. 3200-2800 BC) is the appearance of cylinder 
seals which bear designs with Mesopotamian or Elamite elements. 47 The 
adoption of cylinders in Egypt was, however, a temporary phenomenon, 
Mesopotamian influence or not; they were replaced at the end of the Old 
Kingdom by one of the most typical of Egyptian products, the scarab, which 
is in fact a stamp seal. However, at certain times, notably during the First 
Intermediate Period, immediately prior to the formation of the Middle 
Kingdom (c. 2000-1780 BC) Egypt developed a type of circular stamp seal 
sometimes called a 'button seal', very reminiscent of the Gulf forms. Whilst 
there is certainly no evidence to prove it, it is not beyond the bounds of 
possibility that the early second millennium, a time of great mercantile and 
commercial activity in the Gulf and far beyond it, saw some contact between 
the Dilmunite merchants and Egypt; the remarkable evidence of the 'scaraboid' 
seals from Failaka noted in Chapter 8 will be recalled in this context (Fig 
8.2). It was a time of renewed Asiatic penetration of the Nile Valley. Later, in 
the New Kingdom and subsequently, the scarab became one of the most 
common of all Egyptian artefacts, and replaced the circular stamp. 

The cylinder seal was in many ways a more efficient device than the 
stamp seal, for it allowed a larger surface to be exposed. Thus many cylinders 
carry textual inscriptions, which is not usually the case with Gulf seals; 
cylinders are in consequence more frequently capable of being attributed to 
named owners than are stamp seals. 

The latest and most typical Gulf seals are of a highly distinctive form 
which seems to have evolved over a period, from the latter part of the third 
millennium, and subsequently into the early centuries of the second 
millennium. When the Kassites moved in to control the Mesopotamian plains 
and the Gulf, the stamp seal virtually disappeared, to be replaced by the 
cylinder seal, which thus finally asserted its functional superiority. The hilly 
evolved form of the Gulf seal is a round stamp, rarely more than 2 or 3 
centimetres in diameter and often smaller. Its obverse is flat and on it the 
design is carved: animals, cultic scenes or what often appear at first sight to 
be random elements which are frequently found in various combinations on 
different seals. The motif of the pierced circle or 'eye' found on the domed 
reverse very frequently appears on other Gulf products of the period and is 
often an element in the decoration of, for example, the steatite vessels which 
are found often in large quantities on sites throughout the region. 

The earliest-known seals, other than those from the early Anatolian sites, 
date from the fourth millennium and have been recovered from Syrian and 
Iranian sites. 48 The earliest of these tend to be stamp seals, which had to be 
impressed firmly, held with the fingers, into the clay that was to take their 
image; often, like the seals from early Mesopotamia, they portray formalized 

282 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 

animals, perhaps with a fetishistic or totemic significance. Each level of the 
Sumerian cities' sites and those of their successors has yielded its crop of 
seals, the earliest showing highly stylized, abstract designs, whilst the latter 
ages settled upon graphic designs which often appear to be narrative in their 
purpose. These seals show scenes which can be associated with Mesopotamian 
myth, such as the hero and the bull-man wrestling with animals, a design 
which is customarily (though probably anachronistically) ascribed to the 
Gilgamesh Epic, or, later still, scenes of worship and ritual observance, of 
which the most common is the seal's owner, or perhaps his patron, being 
presented to one of the great divinities. Episodes from the stories of the gods 
are displayed, with Enki, Shamash, Nanna and Inanna being amongst those 
most frequently portrayed. 

The Mesopotamian variety demonstrates well the dual function of the 
seals for, in addition to serving as amulets and thus conferring the protection 
of the divinity whose presence they invoked over the object that they sealed, 
they also became the means, in predominantly non-literate societies, for 
property to be identified. Thus, and in time, temple administrations, the 
rulers of cities and later still the merchants themselves developed their own 
marks which made the identification of their property easy and certain. 
However, it is unlikely that the seals ever wholly lost their amuletic quality. 
They were also used on legal documents to attest the presence of witnesses 
or the consent of the parties concerned. 

Although the princes of antiquity used their seals to engross treaties 
and official papers, there seems little doubt that the majority of the seals 
which survive are the personal signets of merchants and businessmen. 
They are, it might be said, the originals of the trade mark; certainly they 
served the function of a personal crest and represent the beginnings of 
heraldry. 

In Crete, where the extent of ancient trade is incidentally evidenced by 
the presence of Old Babylonian seals, the custom of seal-making was taken 
up keenly, and that elegant civilization predictably produced some of the 
most elegant examples of all. Indeed, with what appears to be the Cretan 
habit of over-sophistication demonstrating itself in this as in other departments 
of their society, the Cretan seals are really gems and are frequently classified 
as such. Amongst the Cretan seals are some which are prismatic in shape. 
Oddly enough, prismatic seals are known from Maysar in Oman, from an 
earlier date than the Cretan examples, derived in fact from an Umm an-Nar 
horizon, in the third millennium. 49 

In the Indus Valley cities a distinctive form of stamp seal was evolved, 
usually square in shape and with a remarkable massivity in the design elements 
which were incorporated on the face. The Indus Valley script appears on 
many of them, often in juxtaposition with the huge, hump-backed bulls 
which are a significant factor in the subcontinent's agronomy even today. 
The reverse of the Indus Valley seal usually shows a slight elevation through 

283 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

which the suspension-hole has been bored. Some of the seals, incidentally, 
seem to portray divinities who were later assumed into the Vedic pantheon. 

That trade routes had been open between the Sumerian cities and those 
of the Indus Valley has long been known by the discovery of Indian seals in 
cities such as Ur. A third, highly individual type of seal was recognized, 
which was clearly neither wholly Indian nor wholly Mesopotamian, though 
the examples recovered seem to contain design elements which could be 
related to both societies. This third category of seals found in Sumer, and 
later in Indus Valley sites, was felt to lie between the other two and so gave 
rise to the speculation that it might have had its origins in the Gulf. The 
excavations in Bahrain and Failaka have confirmed this and that these seals 
are peculiar to Dilmun; as such they are now designated. 

Seals, especially those from sites in the Gulf, are frequently miniature 
works of art of great complexity and appeal. The art of the lapidary must 
have been highly valued in the communities of the ancient world and the 
stone carvers or craftsmen, as precise as the most exact jewellers, repaid 
whatever respect they were accorded by the high standards of their 
craftsmanship. No seal-cutter's tools have survived but what was probably a 
workshop has been found in Bahrain; no doubt small drills, of copper, bronze 
or stone, were employed in cutting the fine detail of the design once the face 
of the seal had been prepared by grinding and polishing the surface. 

The best of the seals demonstrate one of the special glories of ancient art in 
the miniature dimensions employed by these archaic craftsmen: the designs 
can be enlarged to a monumental scale and still retain their proportions and 
their power. In the Gulf, seals are almost invariably made of chlorite, a relatively 
soft stone which is easily worked and which engraves well. Sometimes, in the 
manner of seals from the Indus Valley cities, they are washed with an alkaline 
solution which gives them a milky-white finish; equally often they are found 
in the uncoloured stone. The fact that seals from Dilmun are stamps and that 
several of the earliest of them bear Indus Valley inscriptions has led to the 
suggestion that the form originated from the Indus Valley cities which were 
the destinations of much of the Gulfs merchandise. 



THE SEALS OF THE GULF 

Nearly 1,000 Gulf seals have now been recovered; over 400 come from the 
island of Failaka, in the Bay of Kuwait. 50 A similar number, perhaps more, 
has been found in Bahrain itself, though not all of them have yet been 
published. It is generally believed that the type originated in Bahrain. 

There are two types of seal: the earlier with one or two parallel grooves 
on the obverse of the dome, the later with four quarters in which are often 
set pierced circles. The earlier type tends to emphasize animal figures and 
astral and solar symbols; the later ones, what appear to be ritual scenes. 

284 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 

The seals from Barbar are all of the second, later type, as are those from 
Failaka. The transition from the earlier to the later form seems to have taken 
place during Ur III times, c. 2025 BC. 

The distribution of the Dilmun seals follows the routes which the merchants 
who owned them plied between Sumer and the Indus Valley; the excavations 
at Ur produced the first group, several of which are now in the British 
Museum.'' 1 These seem to show particular Indus Valley relationships. Others 
have been found at Lothal, one of the seaports on the coast of what is now 
Pakistan, serving the Indus cities. 

The dome shape of the reverse, in the case of the earliest forms, is frequently 
more of a cylindrical projection from the seal face than the fully integrated 
dome of the typical Dilmun seal. Some examples are simpler still and are 
merely round stones bisected horizontally: it is possible that it was from this 
form of simple 'button' seal that the dome itself later evolved. The designs, 
with one or two exceptions, are equally simple, in general being confined to 
one subject, frequently an abstract form or an animal. Already, though, two 
creatures which will be found throughout the lifespan of the Dilmun seals 
are in evidence, the scorpion and the bull. 

Amongst the crop of seals from the temple complex at Barbar several 
seem to have been deliberately cast into the 'sacred well'. This group is fully 
realized in format and the designs are highly sophisticated and aesthetically 
pleasing; full and sensitive use is made of the circular face of the seal (Fig. 
7.7). The design of these seals is noticeably uncluttered when compared 
with some of the later examples, where the craftsmen have seemingly not 
been able to resist filling every available millimetre of the surface. The figures 
of men and animals are full of grace and vitality, with that curious sense of 
arrested motion which is always one of the glories of ancient art. 

The largest group of seals from Bahrain comes from the second city level 
at Qala'at al-Bahrain and the Bahrain temples associated with it. They are 
thus to be dated from the end of third millennium and the beginning of the 
second. The latter period was the time of the Alik Tilmun, the guild of Dilmun 
merchants; it was the zenith of Dilmun's commercial influence and importance. 
All obvious traces of Indian influence have now been subsumed in Gulf 
forms, though some elements are retained from earlier times and with them 
some Mesopotamian and Elamite influences are still evident. 

Probably contemporary with these seals, a number of which were found 
among the debris of a seal-cutter's workshop, are those found in the remarkable 
caches amounting to nearly 500 seals discovered in the remains of an early 
second-millennium settlement at Failaka. Whilst these conform to the general 
pattern of Dilmun seal forms, for Failaka was a province of the Dilmun culture 
at this time, they have their own distinctive iconography and, in many ways, 
are the most striking and attractive of all the seals found in the Gulf. 

These later seals are remarkable for their precision, elegance, vitality and 
craftsmanship; the last characteristic only requires the slight and occasional 

285 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

qualification that the seal-cutter apparently was never able to leave well 
alone and displayed a tendency to over-elaboration. 

The seals are also remarkable from one further point of view: that, at the 
present stage of knowledge, their iconography is largely incomprehensible. 
Of course, many of the elements can be identified but it is not yet possible to 
advance a coherent explanation of each seal's design. This, of course, 
presupposes that they are capable of being 'read' and are not merely amalgams 
of different elements (for no two seals are ever wholly alike) which served 
to differentiate one owner's property from another. It seems, on balance, 
and with the precedents of both the Mesopotamian and the Indus Valley 
seals to go on, that they probably did convey some specific ideogrammatic 
significance to the people who used them. 

It has already been noted that in the case of Mesopotamian seals, ritual scenes 
were customarily depicted, whilst the Indus Valley seals frequently incorporated 
inscriptions, although these are also unintelligible. The Dilmun seals are different 
in that they often contain groupings of apparently random elements; but the 
repetition of certain ones, the ibex, gazelle, goat, bucranium, bird, tree, foot, 
scorpion and others in a variety of permutations, suggests that each element had 
a particular significance or that the whole design could be 'read'. 

The ibex, the creature particularly sacred to Enki, is one of the most frequently 
depicted animals, as often found on the Gulf seals as the bull or the scorpion. 
Often the animal is shown in a curious juxtaposition with the other elements of 
the seal's design, even sometimes upside down; not infrequently, it appears 
with its head turned back, looking behind it (Fig. 9- 1). This may be an attempt to 
suggest some sort of astronomical significance and relationship between the 
various elements of the design, each of them perhaps signifying one of the 
celestial bodies or constellations. Many of the recurring elements of the design 
on the seals are identified with the constellations specifically: the bull, the scorpion, 
the lion, the goat, the snake, the bird (sometimes the eagle). 

Many of the designs on the seals seem to be associated with the fertility of 
animals and men. Some of them may symbolize good and evil, the one to be 
identified with the owner of the seal, and the other to be propitiated and its 
malignancy deflected. In the case of the later seals, especially those from Failaka, 
there are hints in the designs of a connection with Syria and eastern Anatolia. 52 
This is interesting in the light of the possibility that there may have been some 
contact between the people of the Gulf in the early second millennium and the 
Levantine coast. 

Attempts have been made to identify specific seals with known Sumerian 
myths, and to suggest that they illustrate, for example, incidents from the 
story of Gilgamesh or the creation myths associated with Dilmun. There is 
no warrant for such attributions, however, and to describe, as often has been 
the case, two male figures on a seal from Failaka as Gilgamesh and his friend 
Enkidu, whilst it is appealing, is misleading. Not enough is known, for 
example, of the understanding which the Sumerians themselves had about 

286 




Figure 9-1 The ibex, often depicted with its head turned back, is frequently 
included in the iconography of the Gulf seals. The ibex was identified with the god 
Enki, himself the most important of the Gulf's divinities, and may represent him on 

the seals. 





Figure 9.2 A Dilmun seal showing 

scorpions circling a maze-like design 

of enclosed squares. 



Figure 93 Linked protomes of ibex 

heads, whirling in a design of great 

antiquity. 



287 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

their own myths, and the possibility must be recognized that the duality of 
Gilgamesh and his friend and the dualism of two figures on a seal, whilst 
probably representing the same principle, do not necessarily represent each 
other. The fact that every figure of a hero wrestling with lions or bulls tends 
to be labelled with Gilgamesh's name, even in cases which clearly preceded 
his historical existence, has already been remarked upon and demonstrates 
the problem of this sort of over-simplification. However, it is only fair to add 
that it does not in the least matter what interpretation is put upon the seals as 
they are quite sufficiently potent and attractive to be admired in their own 
right. Indeed, they are thoroughly engaging, if minor, works of art, tiny 
documents which throw a light, however wavering, on the minds of the men 
who lived in this region 4,000 years and more ago. 

To date the seals of the Gulf, other than those from Failaka, 53 have not 
been published fully, so that knowledge of them even in archaeological 
quarters is very limited. It is to be hoped that eventually, when the complete 
corpus of Dilmun seals is published, they will be recognized as having an 
important part to play in the history of art. In the meantime, it is possible to 
single out some of the seals and some of the elements which frequently 
appear in their design, for even what must of necessity be only a cursory 
examination of a few, produces considerations of great interest. 

The gods, or at least superhuman beings, appear on many of the seals. 
They are identified with animals, with ships and with a companion figure, a 
mysterious part-man, part-bull (whether he is monster or mask is not clear). 
Often the gods wear the typical horned crown or horned turban of Sumerian 
divinities. 

Amongst the Bahrain seals, one of the most common designs represents 
the scorpion, which appears by itself and in conjunction with other elements, 
sometimes literally represented and at others portrayed schematically. Several 
of the scorpion seals are closely similar to examples from Tel Brak in northern 
Syria but may be earlier in date. It seems possible that the scorpion motif 
may have originated in the Gulf, perhaps in Bahrain itself. One of the Barbar 
seals appears to show four scorpions circling a series of superimposed squares, 
which perhaps represent a sacred area or building; this design would 
admirably represent the successive levels of a ziggurat, seen in plan (Fig. 
9.2). 

A design inherited from earlier times is to be recognized in a class of seals, 
from Failaka as well as from Bahrain, which depict whirling ibex or gazelle 
heads, four, five or six joined at the neck (Fig 9-3). These Gulf forms mark a 
return to literal representations of this symbolization of the creature's fleetness, 
for the shape became highly abstracted after its introduction in Samarra ware 
from northern Mesopotamia in the fifth-fourth millennia BC. 

One class of seals, that was categorized as 'erotic' in the eyes of later 
classifiers, though perhaps less certainly in the minds of those who created 
them, is represented by two black seals from Barbar and the second city at 

288 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 





Figure 9-4 A seal which recalls Enki's Figure 95 A seal showing two warriors in 

penetration of a succession of goddesses. confrontation, holding a shield or buckler 

between them. 



289 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Qala'at al-Bahrain. The first shows a gigantic, steatopygous female with her 
massive legs spread apart being penetrated by a more modestly proportioned 
male (Fig 9.4). It is a remarkably athletic copulation for he grasps one of her 
ankles and she appears, oddly, to be standing on one leg as he enters her, a 
difficult enough manoeuvre one would have imagined, even for a divinity. 
It is possible that she is lying above him in what an older generation of 
anthropologists believed was the conventional position for intercourse in a 
matriarchal society. More surprising still is that she appears to be vomiting 
into a jar: even the most fervid imagination might find it difficult to know 
what to make of this scene. The other seal appears to depict the two same 
principals and shows the male, not ithyphallic this time as in the previous 
example, lying passively by the female's opened thighs. This scene does of 
course recall the myth of the healing of Enki by Ninhursag who laid him by 
her vulva (see Chapter 6). These two seals are matched by two others from 
Failaka which appear to depict in one case an act of sodomy and in the other 
a frieze of men and monkeys (perhaps boys?) indulging in some rather curious 
acts. Monkeys are very frequently depicted, often in association with bulls 
or other horned animals. 

Two seals stand out from the Bahrain group, both of them from Barbar, 
for their technique and content seem different from the others, demonstrating, 
as other examples from Failaka do, that despite the normally rigid 
conventionalism of ancient art there was still considerable scope and 
opportunity for the individual artist. The first shows two men in confrontation, 
holding a shield between them, each with a spear grasped in his other hand 
(Fig 9-5). Above them appears an 'eye', an extremely ancient symbol which 
perhaps signified the all-seeing divinity of the sun; countless examples are 
known from, for example, the so-called Eye Temple at Tel Brak, and many 
other sites. The men appear to be wearing either helmets or 'topknots' with 
their hair shaved to the crowns of their heads. 

The other seal shows a male figure standing in a rectangular surround, 
two sides of which each have a pot, a larger and a smaller one, fixed to them 
(Fig. 9.6). Beyond the enclosure, on the left, a gazelle turns its head to look 
at the figure enclosed within it, whilst on the right a scorpion is shown. It 
may be that the two creatures represent life and death and that the scene 
suggests a burial, with the pots that were customarily placed in the tomb; 
equally possible is that a figure in a shrine is intended. 

Curiously, a painting from an Egyptian tomb of the First Intermediate 
period (c. 2000 BC), now in the Egyptian Museum in Berlin, appears to show 
much the same elements; it and the seal are probably roughly contemporary. 54 
A seal from Failaka certainly depicts a complicated ritual scene with two 
figures standing in an enclosure which bears Mesopotamian symbols of 
divinity. 

A frequent representation on Mesopotamian seals is of the 'symposium', 
two or more figures, sometimes human, sometimes divine, drinking through 

290 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 





i^H^MH^^Hi^HI 



i^^^HPP 



Figure 9.6 A figure standing (or lying) within what may be a grave, with two vessels 
built into the walls. The ibex and scorpion outside the enclosure may represent life and 

death respectively. 




Figure 9- 7 An impression showing two figures gesticulating under a palm-tree. 



291 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

long straws from a shared pot. This scene also appears in the Gulf and shows 
two figures gesticulating at each other by a palm-tree, with the moon's crescent 
riding over them (Fig 9-7). It is difficult not to see two Dilmun merchants 
here, perhaps making their way home together after a hard day's commercial 
drinking. More formal representations of two figures drinking through long 
straws also exist on other Dilmun seals. 

An important category of seals comprises those made from seashells, in 
contrast to the chlorite or steatite examples which represent the vast 
preponderance of seals recorded. 55 The shells employed for the making of 
the seals are drawn from the family Conidae. This is a common shell in the 
Gulf and is distinguished by its helical form. The adaptation to a seal shape 
is obtained by sawing off the base of the shell, the Dilmunites evidently 
having realized that each shell has a distinctive configuration in its interior. 

So far, the shell seals have been found only in tombs. In this they are 
different from most Gulf seals, which only occasionally were buried with 
their owners. The shell seals have been found in most types of burial in 
Bahrain, particularly in those from the earlier Dilmunite period. 

Some of the seals have designs drilled on them in a technique which has 
been compared with that used by seal-cutters in Mesopotamia during the 
Jamdet Nasr period, though the Bahraini examples must be chronologically 
much later. Some of them seem to reproduce design elements, particularly 
of animals and solar and stellar symbols, which appear on the Gulf seals 
proper. 

It is not at present clear whether the shell seals are earlier in date than the 
chlorite seals or whether they are contemporary. As they are only found in 
funerary contexts it is, of course, possible that they are simply replicas of the 
real thing, a relatively inexpensive way of ensuring that the dead did not go 
wholly seal-less to the afterlife. 

A notable group of seal impressions was recovered from Barbar. 56 These 
are flattened pellets of clay on which impressions from small seals appear to 
have been made, in some cases on both sides of the bullae. Their function is 
not known and the term 'bullae' has only been applied to them as they are in 
appearance similar to the seal impressions customarily attached to official 
documents in mediaeval Europe. They introduce a range of quite new designs, 
one of which appears on several of them; this seems to be a bundle of reeds, 
bound together at the centre and thus looking rather like the Roman fasces. 

A motif which appears on the Bahrain seals and is also to be found on 
those from Failaka, though apparently less frequently, is a single human 
foot; this may be connected iconographically with the Mesopotamian fringed 
triangle'. The frequency with which the foot appears in Gulf iconography 
and in other contexts in Arabia is striking, to the extent indeed that it is 
difficult to avoid the idea that its appearance in the Barbar temple is not 
accidental. Perhaps it is intended to convey the idea of eternal contact with 
the chthonic gods, of whom Enki was certainly one and perhaps the first and 

292 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 



greatest, by means of the one part of the human body which is generally in 
permanent contact with the earth, beneath whose surface the gods of the 
underworld dwell. 



THE FAILAKA SEALS 

The sheer quantity of seals from Failaka, where there does not seem to have 
been an important settlement or large port, is remarkable and frankly puzzling. 
No part of the site yet suggests a settlement in any way approaching in size 
and importance as an urban centre the Bahrain City II site. Yet from the latter 
fewer seals have been recovered than from Failaka and fewer still from the 
temple site at Barbar. The one site on Failaka has provided a substantial 
number of all the known examples. The eastern province of Saudi Arabia 
has yielded five seals but, of course, no major city site of the period has yet 
been excavated there. 

One explanation, though it must be regarded as wholly speculative, for 
this concentration of seals on Failaka, would relate to the island's sacred 
character; perhaps it was customary to dedicate the seals to the presiding 
divinity, on a merchant's death, for example, or on his retirement from 
business. But until more of the Failaka site is excavated it is really idle thus to 
speculate. However, it is likely that Failaka acted as some sort of customs 
post for goods intended for onward shipment to Mesopotamia and the seals 
may simply have formed some sort of deposit or recording system. 

The Failaka seal designs are generally, though not always, more complex 
and involved than the Bahraini examples. Animal forms predominate with 
scenes of sacrifice being common. The principal sacrificial animal appears 
to be the bull, but gazelle and ibex are also selected, and scenes of the 
chase are frequently depicted. Arrian makes the point that, in the time of 
Alexander, deer and wild goats were bred on Failaka for sacrifice to the 
island's goddess. 

A variety of elements recurs in the Failaka seals. A large bird, perhaps an 
ostrich, or, since two of them are shown on a seal surmounting a large bull of 
Indus type, possibly 'the bird of Melukhkha' which is thought to have been 
the peacock, are often included in the iconography. Whatever species it is, 
the bird on the seals is clearly the same as the copper bird excavated at 
Barbar. 

A puzzling feature on many seals, from both Bahrain and Failaka, is a 
chequer design of regular squares, sometimes 9, 15, 16, 20, 24, 28 and, in 
one case, 40 in number (Fig. 9.8). These chequers are usually shown in close 
association with significant human or divine figures who may be standing 
on or over them as if they were altars, holding them or presenting them. Like 
the Egyptian hieroglyph which has a similar form, this symbol may represent 
a town or settlement and the figure with which it is associated, either 

293 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 




Figure 9.8 One of the finest and most monumental seals recovered from Bahrain. 




Figure 9-9 A design of striking moder- 
nity, recalling Matisse, of three figures in 
a boat. 



Figure 9.10 Two lahmu depicted on a 
seal banded in gold. 



294 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 

the king or its tutelary divinity. Occasionally, animal heads project from the 
chequer design. 

It is notoriously difficult to interpret the intentions of ancient craftsmen 
and artists or to attempt to determine what purpose was in their minds. 
However, there is one category of seals that is especially interesting and, by 
the frequency with which one particular motif is present, perhaps one of 
special significance to the whole region, though the seals come principally 
from Failaka. This group of seals seems to display evidence of an extensive 
and highly developed bull cult. 

If it were possible to speculate about the principal religious cult at Failaka, 
it would be reasonable to suppose this to have been concerned with bulls, 
as some of the most remarkable of the designs feature the bull in what are 
obviously ritual contexts. A figure who appears on both the Failaka and the 
Bahraini seals introduces a mysterious and hieratic personage: a man with 
hoofed feet and a tail, wearing what may be a bull-mask, a variation of the 
horned turban of Sumerian divinities, is frequently portrayed (Fig. 9-8). In 
one seal he holds the severed head of a bull, standing on the chequer symbol 
as two ibexes turn their heads away; in another two masked figures support 
a third, less distinct, personage upon an altar. Above them, one of the great 
eight-petalled rosettes which frequently occur on the Failaka seals dominates 
the middle ground with two more beside the officiants at the sacrifice, if that 
is what the scene depicts. Above them, two bulls stand whilst monkeys leap 
on their backs. The altars depicted on these seals are crescent-shaped, similar 
to the crescent 'horned' altars which are to be found in the 'temple' at Sar, in 
Bahrain. 

The last of the seals featuring bulls to be described here is one which 
recalls, however anachronistically, the treasure of the Royal Tombs at Ur. 
Some of the most spectacular of the Ur finds were the great ceremonial harps 
and lyres which were buried with the dead princes and their courtiers. These 
were notable for the finely worked bull-heads which decorated the sounding 
boxes of the lyres. On the Failaka seal a man is shown, seated and drawing 
his fingers across the lyre's strings. But the lyre itself has turned into a bull 
with the instrument's front strut projecting from the animal's back, an artist's 
extension, obviously, of the idea of the bull-headed sounding-box. Gudea, 
the king of Lagash, incidentally, records that a lyre, which he dedicated to a 
temple in his city, 'bellowed like a bull' when played. 

The 'harp-bulP is standing on the back of another, larger bull, before 
which stands a man with an axe raised over the head of the animal, which is 
clearly intended to be a sacrifice. A palm branch, a bird, an open square and 
what are probably planetary symbols complete an intricate and remarkable 
design. It is possible that the votive axes at Barbar commemorated the bull 
sacrifice, here seemingly depicted. There is evidence that animals were 
sacrificed in the temple and all or part of their carcases burned as offerings to 
the waiting gods. 

295 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

These bull motifs on the Failaka seals do prompt speculations which, in 
their implications, are tantalizing. If a cult of the bull existed in the Gulf at 
the end of the third millennium, this itself is surprising enough: but taken 
with the seeming evidence of rituals and symbolism which became, in later 
centuries, associated with the northern Levantine coast and from there were 
transmitted to Crete, the prospect opened up is, in archaeological and historical 
terms, extraordinary. 57 Perhaps, as so frequently has been confirmed by others 
about his reports, which once were regarded as wholly unreliable and then 
were proved to be accurate, Herodotus had sound reasons for relating the 
belief that the Phoenicians came originally from the Gulf. In this case, however, 
it perhaps was not the Phoenicians of whom he ought to have been speaking 
but their predecessors, the peoples who populated the Levantine coast at 
the beginning of the second millennium and who brought with them bull 
cults which were to be transplanted so spectacularly to that other island, 
Crete, in the second millennium. 

If it could be substantiated that the islanders of the Gulf emigrated to the 
Levant, perhaps around the beginning of the second quarter of the second 
millennium, it would explain why there seems to have been a sudden break 
in continuity, at least in religious practice, in Bahrain and in Failaka at that 
time. Though several small objects from the second millennium have been 
found, the ruins of the third-millennium settlement at Failaka do not seem to 
have been succeeded by any important buildings until Hellenistic times, just 
as the last temple at Barbar, c. 2000 BC, seems to be followed by an 
abandonment of the site. 

Other seals from Failaka may be mentioned briefly: a beautiful and almost 
Matisse-like design of two men apparently masked, standing in a boat with 
an animal-headed prow; one of the men holds a bow (Fig. 9-9). A third, 
smaller figure is leaping from it, his leg thrown up over the stern; he holds a 
baton or sword. One of the most handsome of all the seals, and so far 
unparalleled, is double-sided with a milled edge which, with the dignity of 
its design, gives it the appearance of a Renaissance medallion; on one side 
two men are seen in a boat, in the act of worship, one of them holding a 
palm branch; on the other side, a divinity is enthroned, with a worshipper 
standing before him. 

Of particular interest to the cults of Dilmun is the seal which shows a tall, 
etiolated, standing figure in the centre of the seal with the remainder of the 
surface incised with vertical registers of a cuneiform text, so far the only one 
to be found on any seal from Dilmun. The text is an invocation to Inzak, god 
of Dilmun, and recalls the Durand inscription with which it is approximately 
contemporary. Another seal unique in form and technique is cut in a fine 
green steatite. Two men stand, looking outwards from the seal, caught for 
ever in some ritual, perfectly symmetrical action. They are naked but for 
belts around their waists, which are of an almost Cretan narrowness; their 
fingers are entwined. Both have elegantly curled wigs and beards of a form 

296 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 

known from Sumerian precedents: they are perhaps lahmu 'hairy ones' who 
were creatures of Enki living in the Apsu (Fig. 9-10). 5K On the other face of 
the seal a circle encloses an eight-rayed star and at the four cardinal points, 
an ibex stands, the creature of Enki; between each ibex is an eight-petalled 
rosette. The seal is banded with gold, suggesting that its owner might have 
been royal, and in this it has no precedent. 

From a group of Dilmun-type seals excavated at Ur and now in the British 
Museum comes one which has a design strangely different from any others 
and which would seem more appropriate to a later age. 59 A man is portrayed 
bearing on his shoulders a pole from which hang two large pots; above him 
there are two stars or rosettes, and beside him, two indeterminate creatures. 
This design is most evocative of the water-carrier; perhaps it is Akki, the 
drawer of water, commemorated in the legend of Sargon's birth and 
upbringing, who is here depicted. 

One late Sumerian cylinder seal, dating to the very early second millennium, 
has been found on Bahrain; it comes from the time of the Isin-Larsa dynasty. 
It is thought to be comparable in date with a Dilmun seal impression found 
on a tablet, probably from Ur, which can be dated precisely to the tenth year 
of King Gugunum of Larsa, in 1923 BC. This is one of the few reasonably 
certain dates in the history of the region. A small number of cylinder seals 
bear Gulf designs, adapted to the form of seal which predominated in 
Mesopotamia. 60 

The study of ancient seals is profoundly revealing of the societies which 
made them; seals also exercise a special appeal in that they are wholly personal 
objects and, although this cannot positively be asserted, may well represent 
in their design and symbolism the direct choice of the men who first owned 
them so long ago. It may be said that some of the Dilmun seals equal the 
finest achievements of gem-cutters from far more celebrated cultures and 
that they deserve to rank high in the history of glyptic art. It would be difficult 
to have imagined a more unlikely prospect when excavations first began in 
Bahrain but, in many ways, the seals of Dilmun may prove to be among the 
most significant additions to the corpus of knowledge of the ancient world 
to have been gained in recent years. 

It is becoming increasingly clear that the Gulf's commercial and trading 
network in antiquity was a good deal more extended and complex, and its 
mechanisms much more sophisticated, than seemed to be the case only a 
few years ago. Then it appeared that its principal role was to serve as a link 
between the cities of Sumer on the one hand and the movement of raw 
materials and manufactured goods on the other, on a north-south axis. 61 

The geographical range of the trading centres which were linked by the 
networks was very extensive. Whilst Mesopotamia appears to have been the 
focus of the trade, this may be illusory; in the earliest times, in the fourth 
millennium and the early third, the area which was associated through 
common trading links, ran from Anatolia through northern Syria and 

297 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Mesopotamia to Iran and onto Central Asia in the east, and the Indus Valley 
to the south. The border lands with Afghanistan were regularly involved and 
provided access, for example, for the distribution of the precious lapis lazuli 
which was brought down from the far north of Afghanistan and eventually 
reached markets as far away as the little courts of the Nile Valley in late 
Predynastic times. 

The city-states which were emerging in Sumer in the fourth millennium 
and which flourished for most of the third, undoubtedly provided much of 
the dynamic for the system of exchange which operated over this vast area. 
By the middle of the third millennium there was a significant merchant class 
in the cities, which was replicated in more distant centres such as Ebla. It is 
also becoming clear that the cities (to use a term which may be marginally 
anachronistic) in Central Asia, which served the trade routes, were the products 
of societies which in many ways were comparable with those in Mesopotamia, 
though it is not certain whether they supported the type of organized 
commercial systems that the Mesopotamians developed. 

However, whatever may have been the part played by other of the various 
centres in sustaining the wide-ranging commercial structures on which the 
region depended, there is no doubt that the Gulf itself was one of the principal 
factors in the creation of this international trading network. It provided the 
medium for contact and exchange between regions which were of crucial 
importance for the movement of goods and influences. The Gulf served not 
only the cities of Sumer and their hinterland but Elam and Iran and provided 
access to the Indus Valley cities. It also served as an outlet for the traders 
moving across the Iranian plateau. 

The dynamic focus of the region's trade shifted from time to time. Thus, in 
the Uruk period (late fourth millennium) it was the Sumerian cities which 
dominated the exchanges; then, Uruk's influence seems to have been replaced 
by Elam, centred in Susiana. 62 This is of particular interest for it is at this time 
that the so-called Mesopotamian influences, which are more accurately to 
be categorized as Elamite (or proto-Elamite), appear as far away as Egypt, 
suggesting a considerable influence of the traders from the northeastern end 
of the Gulf at this time. There is also a notable diffusion of bureaucratic 
technologies at this time, in the use of recording systems, writing and the use 
of cuneiform, and the ubiquitous employment of baked clay tablets. 

There has been a tendency to focus especially on the importance of the 
Sumerians' search for metals as the key factor in the development of the Gulf 
as a commercial waterway. The discovery of sources of metals was clearly of 
great value to the cities of the north — and, perhaps to a lesser degree the 
settlements of Central Asia — but of equal importance was the search for 
high-quality stone, a resource which was generally lacking, especially in 
Sumer. Stone was essential for the building and adornment of the public 
buildings in the Sumerian cities; one of the enduring mysteries of the Sumerian 
cultural dynamic was the creation of great buildings at the very beginning of 

298 



THE MERCHANTS OF DILMUN 

the process of urbanization in the fourth millennium, when there seems to 
have been no antecedant tradition on which the people of Sumer might 
draw. 

This need for the acquisition of stone may be why Oman was of such 
significance in the early third millennium, at a time when the rest of the Gulf 
was really only just beginning to develop advanced communities. Expeditions 
to recover the fine stone of which Oman is generously possessed, are recorded 
in the later centuries of the third millennium, which suggest that the trade 
was of long standing. This is further borne out by the discovery of Jemdet 
Nasr (late fourth millennium) to Early Dynastic II (c. 2700 BC) pottery in 
graves excavated in Oman. 63 

The expeditions to Oman in search of stone may have provided the 
opportunity by which sources of copper were identified in the north of the 
country. Oman became an important supplier of copper ore for Sumer from 
the second quarter of the third millennium; prior to this it is likely that Sumer 
received its copper from Anatolia but, for reasons that are not yet clear, this 
source became unavailable and an alternative had to be found. How the 
Sumerians knew that Oman was copper rich is obscure; they may well have 
found ore-bearing rocks when they were quarrying for stone, but that in 
turn begs the question of how they knew that the stone which they needed 
was to be found in Oman in the first place. 



299 



10 



GILGAMESH, THE GULF AND 
THE LAND OF THE LIVING 



The Sumerians were the first people to create an heroic literature, the record 
of the deeds of great men, in part historical personalities and in part the 
figures of legend. They were followed, with evident enthusiasm, by the 
Akkadians and Babylonians, who also recorded myths which have become 
part of the common literary currency of western man. In these stories the 
Mycenaean heroes of Homer and the doom-ridden protagonists of Northern 
myth have their forebears. 

Dilmun, represented as a secure, peaceful and temperate land, figures in 
the first great epic poem which has survived from the earliest records of 
civilized urban man. In it is contained one of the great archetypes of legend 
found in lands all over the world, the story of the universal Deluge. It is also 
the story of one of the most completely realized figures of heroic myth, the 
generous-hearted Shepherd King of Uruk, Gilgamesh, and of his journey 
across the waters of death, ferried by a solitary boatman, to the Land where 
the Sun Rises in search of the illusion which still obsesses man, the restoration 
of lost youth. 1 

Probably for as long as speech has been possible, men have invented 
stories in an attempt to explain the purpose of their existence, of their 
relationship with the natural world around them and in the hope that they 
might make the unseen world less fearful. Myth is of overwhelming 
importance in the development of human culture. Not only does it embody 
many of the fundamental beliefs which man has formed about himself, but 
in it is often enshrined much historical reality, even if it is dimly and 
uncertainly recalled. The themes and subjects of myth lie at the threshold 
of man's discovery of art. 

When myth coincides with historical experience it becomes especially 
powerful, for then reality mirrors the deepest longings and fears of the 
human psyche. Such may have happened if ever Oedipus was a limping 
king in Thebes or when a local catastrophe was magnified to enclose the 
Sumerians' fears of a recurring universal deluge. In these circumstances 
the event recalled in myth becomes inextricably welded into the pattern of 
human experience. 

300 



GILGAMESH, THE GULF AND THE LAND OF THE LIVING 

The oldest recorded cycle of epic myth in the world tells of the triumphs 
and disasters of a Sumerian king, Gilgamesh of Uruk. In his struggle against 
the tremendous odds which beset him, Gilgamesh is the archetypal hero, 
ranking with Herakles — of whom indeed he may be the inspiration — and 
Siegfried but a great deal more agreeable than either. Those who have 
described Akhnaton, 2 the god-possessed Pharaoh of the fourteenth century 
BC as the first individual in history, overlook Gilgamesh. 

Gilgamesh (his name is said to be a Babylonian corruption of the Sumerian 
form of the name Bilga-mes, which apparently means 'the old man is a young 
man') 3 reigned in Uruk during the twenty-seventh century BC. He is thus 
approximately a contemporary of Djoser, the second king of the Third Dynasty 
of Egypt's Old Kingdom and the inspiration of the titanic stepped pyramid at 
Saqqara. Little is known of the historical events of Gilgamesh's reign but it is 
clear that he was a sovereign well loved by his people and remembered 
gratefully by them. He was the fifth king in the post-diluvian dynasty of 
Uruk, after the reigns of the gods. His immediate predecessors included 
Lugalbanda, who seems to have been an historical figure, and Dummuzi, 
who is described as a shepherd and is almost certainly the god later known 
to the peoples of the Levant as Tammuz, whose name is perpetuated in the 
Jewish and Arabic names of the month which commemorates him to this 
day. Gilgamesh speaks of Lugalbanda as his father, although his paternity is 
disputed. He was said to be two-thirds divine for his mother was a goddess 
Ninsun, 'The Lady Wild Cow': his birth was probably the consequence of his 
mother's participation in one of the sacred marriage rites, the temple ceremony 
which year by year ensured the fecundity of the city. 

Gilgamesh is one of the most popular subjects in Sumerian and Babylonian 
art, in which he is depicted as a young man, bearded and vigorous, enacting 
scenes from his epic history. Frequently he is shown in the company of gods 
and animals, reflecting an early belief that man stood somewhere between 
these two orders of creation. Almost invariably he seems to be smiling and 
exulting in the twin powers of his kingship and his manhood, and as a king 
walks as happily with beasts as with divinities. He fortified his city against 
invasion and gave laws to his people which anticipated the code of 
Hammurabi, another great Mesopotamian sovereign who was to rule in 
Babylon a thousand years after Gilgamesh. 

The story of Gilgamesh's journey to Dilmun is recorded in the Epic of 
Gilgamesh which in the form in which it substantially survives today was 
written down during the eighteenth century before our era. 4 But this version 
undoubtedly drew on a much older Sumerian original, reaching us from the 
third millennium; parts of this earlier text survive and the other versions call 
on parts of the original now lost. The most complete text is preserved in 
twelve tablets of baked clay, written in the wedge-shaped cuneiform script 
of the first Babylonian empire. The tablets were found in the ruins of the 
library of King Assurbanipal (668-633 BC) who, in addition to being a great 

301 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

conqueror, was a conscientious antiquarian, who collected with enthusiasm 
and appreciation the records and legends of those who had preceded him 
on the thrones of Mesopotamia. 

Over the past century or so various recensions of the myth have been 
published. A problem arises in relating them out of a scholarly context, in 
that the names of the principal characters are different in each version; only 
Gilgamesh himself seems to preserve his own consistent identity. Thus the 
character of the immortalized king of Shurupak, the prototype of Noah, is 
called Ziusudra in the Sumerian text, but Utanapishtim in the Babylonian 
and Assyrian. The mysterious boatman who ferries Gilgamesh across the 
Waters of Death is Sursunabi and Urshanabi respectively. In the outline which 
follows, the names are used as they appear in the original versions though 
the incident quoted may only appear in the non-Sumerian recensions which 
survive. 

The story is as follows: Gilgamesh, the young and vigorous king of one of 
the oldest and most important of Sumer's states, is loved by his people, but 
with certain distinct reservations. His nature, two-thirds divine and one-third 
human by his descent from the Great Goddess of Sumer and a High Priest 
(or from Lugalbanda, who by his kingly office would also have been a cult- 
priest), is tempestuous and uncontrolled. The citizens of Uruk have become 
increasingly unenthusiastic about his assaults on their wives and daughters 
and his appropriation of their sons for his campaigns. However, since the 
inhabitants of Uruk are a responsible people with a proper respect for both 
the divine parentage and earthly rank of their king, they seek the advice of 
the great god Enlil. They beg him to devise some distraction for Gilgamesh 
which will turn his energies away from their relations. The god sympathizes 
with their problems and creates Enkidu to be the king's companion, a wild, 
untamed man living in company with the animals. Enkidu may symbolize 
the second mainstream of the people of Mesopotamia other than the settled 
city-dwellers, the Semitic-speaking nomads who entered the land from earliest 
times, often intermarrying with the Sumerians themselves. Enkidu's destiny 
is to become the twin of Gilgamesh, the king's alter ego. Not altogether 
surprisingly, in view of his record of fairly indiscriminate sexuality, Gilgamesh 
is deeply attracted by him and they swear eternal friendship; there are indeed 
hints that their relationship is a sexual one. In the manner of boys who 
ultimately become inseparable, this relationship only develops after they 
have fought a great battle, in which Gilgamesh defeats Enkidu. 'They grappled, 
each other holding fast like Bulls.' 

Unhappily, the seeds of the destruction of their friendship have already 
begun to germinate: Enkidu has only been coaxed to the habitations of men 
by the wiles of the town whore, probably a priestess of the Mother in her 
character of the goddess of love and lust, who seduces him by the river 
bank. Hitherto he has run wild, as free and untrammelled as the gazelles and 
other fauna with whom he has shared the desert. But now, because the 

302 



GILGAMESH, THE GULF AND THE LAND OF THE LIVING 

animals who have been his companions to this point sense the corruption of 
humanity on Enkidu, they withdraw reproachfully from him, leaving him to 
the fortunes of gods and men. However, it is by the power of love that 
Enkidu, the wild man of the steppe, becomes civilized. Despite his primitive 
character Enkidu is a complex figure: he is the first innocent in all literature, 
the literary ancestor of Parsifal. 

To some commentators, those who seek an astrological significance in 
events and personalities which probably would have considerably surprised 
those concerned had they known of them, Gilgamesh and Enkidu may 
represent the Twins, the eponyms of the epoch of Gemini superseded by 
that of the Bull in the concept of the Universal Zodiac which, some believe, 
may descend from ancient Mesopotamia. 5 The only problem with this 
interpretation is, of course, that the Twins overthrow the Bull, as will shortly 
be related, and not the other way about. Sometimes Gilgamesh and Enkidu 
(or rather those two characters from an earlier time who seem to prefigure 
them) appear as Bull and Ram, thus symbolizing the poetic Precession of the 
Equinoxes. The Twins even overthrow the Bull of Heaven when it is sent 
precipitately to earth to destroy them. They represent, too, that constantly 
returning principle of the dualism of all the created world which so obsessed 
the ancients. It has been suggested that the whole Gilgamesh cycle is in fact 
a solar myth with an occult, astrological significance. There are twelve divisions 
in the epic — but who knows? 

Gilgamesh's love for Enkidu brings him to a sense of his responsibilities 
for his kingdom, and he no longer concerns himself with leaping upon the 
more personable members of the Uruk community. With the blessing of 
Shamash, the benevolent sun-god, the two friends set out on a quest to 
conquer evil manifest in the form of Huwawa, the Keeper of the Wood. 
Gilgamesh is anxious to create a 'name' which will endure. Enkidu is his 
companion and occasionally his protector. Huwawa is the prototype of the 
sad monster, with whom it is difficult not to feel a similar degree of sympathy 
as with Fafnir when he is overcome by the doltish Siegfried. Dragon- or 
monster-slaying was a major preoccupation of the heroes of antiquity; Horus, 
the Archangel Michael, even Yahweh, were all given to the practice. 

After many trials the pair defeat Huwawa and when he is at their mercy, 
Gilgamesh is inclined to be compassionate and to spare his life. Weeping, 
Huwawa pleads to be saved: but Enkidu, fulfilling what is evidently his 
destiny, is inflexible and demands his death. Huwawa is swiftly slain. 

The heroes return to Uruk and are feted in a splendid and triumphant 
entry to the city. But they are guilty of hubris; Enkidu has angered the gods 
both by his refusal to spare Huwawa and because he joined with Gilgamesh 
in insulting Inanna-Ishtar, a goddess of uncertain temper at the best of times. 
She tries to persuade Gilgamesh to her bed but he, prompted by Enkidu, 
reminds her of the dismal fate of her previous lovers. The friends mock her 
unmercifully and with deadly accuracy. She complains to heaven of the 

303 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

wrong which has been done her, the more annoying as all the taunts and 
accusations of libidinousness and treachery which are flung at her by 
Gilgamesh and Enkidu when they spurn her, she knows only too well to be 
true. But for these faults and also because they have killed the Bull of Heaven, 
sent to avenge the goddess, one of the two must die. Enkidu dreams of the 
congress of the gods when the fearful decision is spoken by the supreme 
God; it is Enkidu who is stricken. 

The mortal illness of Enkidu, which lasts for twelve days, is the occasion 
for a remarkable and moving exchange between the dying man and Shamash 
the sun-god, who has taken a benevolent interest in the affairs of the two 
companions. He alone opposed the ruling of the gods when they agreed 
upon Enkidu's death and now he comes to solace the last hours of one of his 
proteges. 

Enkidu tosses miserably on his death-bed; Gilgamesh is powerless to help 
him. Enkidu curses his life with a bitterness made utter by his realization of 
the futility even of his cursing. Frenziedly he reproaches the events which 
drew him away from his natural existence to the haunts of men, and even 
inanimate objects in his delirium become the focus of his dreadful sorrow. 
He curses the hunter who led the people of Uruk to his steppe-lair; most 
bitterly he execrates the whore who was the instrument of his ensnaring. But 
in Heaven, Shamash hears Enkidu and speaks to comfort him. He reminds 
him that life with Gilgamesh has been glorious; the princes of the world 
have honoured him because he was Gilgamesh's companion; indeed they 
have kissed his feet as he was the king's beloved friend. He has lived 
magnificently and now he must die knowing that Gilgamesh will command 
the most elaborate obsequies for him. 

In the words of the myth: 'when Enkidu heard the words of valiant Shamash, 
his vexed heart grew quiet.' Now he blesses those whom before he cursed 
and, although he has a dark vision of the afterworld before his eyes, he dies 
reconciled by the sun-god's words. 

Gilgamesh mourns his dead friend with the frenzy and inconsolable grief 
of Achilles bewailing the death of Patroclus and, like Alexander of Macedon 
weeping beside Hephaestion's corpse, he clasps the body of his friend until 
the horrifying evidence of corruption begins to display itself. He speaks a 
lament for Enkidu which anticipates that of David for Jonathan. He orders 
sumptuous funeral ceremonies in Uruk and then, horror-stricken, realizes 
that the same mortality which has claimed his friend must one day bring an 
end to his own life, splendid, powerful and just though he knows himself to 
be. The death of Enkidu and Gilgamesh's mourning for his friend, inevitably 
perhaps, seem to be an especially contemporary theme. 

Again he sets out, this time alone, to search for the secret of eternal life, 
the most constant and the most fruitless of man's quests. He is still bitterly 
saddened by Enkidu's death and constantly speaks of his love for him, his 
own awareness of life's transience feeding upon his melancholy. In the words 

304 



GILGAMESH, THE GULF AND THE LAND OF THE LIVING 

of the epic, 'the Lord towards the Land of the Living set his mind' across the 
marshlands and southwards to the Gulf. 

The rejection of Inanna-Ishtar and the subsequent death of Enkidu represent 
a curious episode in Gilgamesh's story because, of all divinities, it might 
have been expected that she was the one whom Gilgamesh would most 
honour. She was the patroness of Uruk itself, Gilgamesh's own city and his 
mother was probably a priestess of her cult; yet the king is clearly in opposition 
to her. 

Some might speculate whether this episode does not record, in mythological 
terms, a rejection by Gilgamesh of the ultimate payment exacted for the 
kingship in societies which still honoured the Mother. Gilgamesh conforms 
admirably to the character of the Sacred King. The myth of Tammuz-Dummuzi, 
which still echoes in the Near East to this day, was the story of the dying king 
for whom the goddess mourns but always recreates that he may again be 
sacrificed. When male gods began to predominate in ancient societies there 
was revulsion from the archaic sacrifice of the Sacred King, consecrated to 
destruction for the honour of the Goddess. The transitional phase, between 
the sacrifice of the king and its rejection, was marked by the recognition that 
a surrogate might die in the king's place and his royal life be thus renewed. 
In Greece the practice seems to have been well attested and there are hints 
of it amongst the ancient Jews. 

In Egypt, the king underwent the ordeal of rebirth at the heb-sed festival, 
when his powers were renewed. It is generally proposed that the heb-sed is 
a surrogate act for the ritual sacrifice of the king, though in fact there is no 
evidence for the practice. 6 Christianity, it has long been recognized, enshrines 
the age-old concept of the dying god, whose physical death is reenacted — 
as, similarly, was the death of Osiris in Egypt through the mystery plays 
which were a feature of the earliest rituals — by the sacrifice of the Mass, in 
which the central event is the ingestation of the consecrated bread, rather 
than the celebrant. The bread is thus a substitute for the living flesh, once 
consumed in a more dreadful eucharist. 

It may also be that this episode in Gilgamesh's story contains some of the 
essential elements of the sacred marriage rite of old Sumer and that Gilgamesh 
was in truth intended to be the successor of Dummuzi in the love of Inanna, 
the city-goddess of Uruk. In later ages the rite of the sacred marriage recurs 
frequently and it was clearly an integral part of the Sumerian canon, surviving 
into times after Sumer itself had passed away and was forgotten. It has been 
suggested that the burial pit at Ur, in which the unbelievably rich accoutrements 
of a presumed Sumerian royal interment were found, contains the principal 
actors in the same ceremony. The later deification of certain Sumerian kings — 
in itself a wholly un-Sumerian practice — in the time of the Third Dynasty of 
Ur may be yet another echo of this ancient ceremony in which the king and 
the god who ensures the continued fertility of crops and herds are identified. 
But in Gilgamesh's case, great though his love for his people unquestionably 

305 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

is, he is not prepared to die at the whim of the goddess and, by his rejection 
of his role, marks the end of her domination. Gilgamesh's denial of his 
sacrificial character cannot be absolute, however, and therefore his surrogate, 
Enkidu, his twin as dear to him as any living thing, must die in his place. 

North-east of Gilgamesh's city of Uruk lay the Kingdom of Shuruppak, the 
modern Fara. Shuruppak was the home of Ziusudra ('Long of Days') or, as 
the Babylonians called him in their version of the myth which survives, 
Utanapishtim, a name which may mean, appropriately as it turns out, 'I have 
found Life'; he was known, evocatively, as 'The Faraway'. He was said to 
have reigned in Shuruppak for 36,000 years, a period which reflects the 
Sumerians' enthusiasm for the sexagesimal scale, which they invented. He 
was destined to become the hero of the Deluge story, like the Biblical Noah 
and the Greek Xisuthros, the good and wise king singled out by the gods for 
salvation when they determined to destroy the rest of the human race, with 
whom they had become disenchanted. In a long digression which must be 
reflected here, the Epic explains the reason for their displeasure. 

The gods of Sumer were even more arbitrary in their relations with mankind 
than the Hebrew god Yahweh was to be, for at least in the version contained 
in Genesis the Deluge was occasioned by God's wrath being visited upon 
the sins of the created world. The gods of Sumer, and their leader Enlil in 
particular, could not, it seems, tolerate the noise that mankind was making 
and on this petulant pretext determined to destroy the race of men by flood. 
Man was not destined to be wholly annihilated, however. Despite the stern 
decree of the High Gods in council, Enki, the friend of man and ruler of the 
floodwaters, decided to intervene, thus risking the wrath of Enlil. But so that 
he might not be accused of betraying the gods' decision, he came to Ziusudra's 
city and, with the cunning and resource which rarely deserted the most 
crafty of the gods, whispered his warning to the wall of the king's reed hut. 
Through the wall he urged Ziusudra to build an ark, put his family and 
retainers on board and, with a cargo of all living creatures, to set out upon 
the rising waters. 

The Sumerian epic contains many dramatic passages which differ from 
the Biblical story; the description of the mounting terror of the storm, led by 
the black powers of wind and thunder, is particularly striking. 

With the first glow of dawn 

A black cloud rose up from the horizon 

Inside it Adad thunders 

While Shullat and Hanish go in front 

Moving as heralds over hill and plain 

Erragal tears out the posts; 

Forth comes Ninurta and causes the dykes to follow 

The Annunaki lift up the torches 

Setting the land ablaze with their glare 

306 



GILGAMESH, THE GULF AND THE LAND OF THE LIVING 

Consternation over Adad reaches to the heavens 

Who turned to blackness all that had been light 

The wide land was shattered like a pot 

For one day the south storm blew. 

Gathering speed as it blew submerging the mountains 

Overtaking the people like a battle 

No one can see his fellow 

Nor can the people be recognized from heaven 

The gods were frightened by the deluge 

And, shrinking back, they ascended to the heaven of Anu 

The gods cowered like dogs crouched against the outer wall. 7 

Ever since the last century when the 'Deluge' tablet was first deciphered, 
the argument has swung back and forth as to whether the story recalls a 
major catastrophe actually experienced by the Sumerians and subsequently 
impressed deeply on their memory, or whether it is merely the literary 
expression of what must have been a constant and deep-seated fear of a 
people living between two such unpredictable streams as Tigris and 
Euphrates. 

Woolley, who excavated so diligently and with such effect in Sumerian 
cities, firmly believed in the historicity of the Biblical flood, admittedly 
on slender evidence; 8 in more recent years it has been usual to adopt the 
contrary view. But floods in Sumer there certainly were and one — or all 
of them — may have been immortalized in the original of the myth, told 
around the camp fires, perhaps even before Enki founded his first city at 
Eridu. 

More recent evidence has become available, however, which opens the 
question again. First, it now seems likely that Ziusudra/Utanapishtim/Noah 
was an historical figure and not simply the man with the amiable manner 
and a taste for zoology whom the legends, both Sumerian and Biblical, 
portray. At Shuruppak, Ziusudra's capital, and at Kish, one of the most 
respected religious sites of ancient Sumer, extensive flood deposits have 
been uncovered since Woolley's time which are almost certainly 
contemporary with Ziusudra's supposed reign and are more widespread 
than had been earlier believed. 9 It is clear that the floodwaters covered 
considerable areas of the land and could quite easily have been mistaken 
for a universal deluge by the survivors, so terrible must have been the 
havoc they wrought. The flood would seem to have covered an area many 
square kilometres in extent to a considerable depth, and the persistent 
legend which has survived the millennia may thus be based upon a real 
and fearful experience. This deluge at Shuruppak may have taken place 
towards the end of the Jemdet Nasr period, c. 3000 BC. 10 

To return to the version of the Flood which the Epic relates: like 
Noah when the deluge had abated, Ziusudra releases birds as his 

307 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

messengers to find dry land, but it is the raven rather than the dove 
which makes the landfall in the Sumerian legend. On the mountain-top 
where his ark — a peculiar, perfectly cubical vessel — comes to rest, 
Ziusudra offers sacrifices to the gods who are said, rather gracelessly, 
to hover around the sacrifices 'like flies' hungry for the worship which 
has been denied them by the destruction of the creatures they created, 
in part for this very purpose. A slightly acid view of the behaviour of 
the Sumerian pantheon is not unreasonable; it is apparent from the 
passage quoted earlier that at one stage the whole operation was 
beginning to get out of hand when the gods, obviously inexperienced 
in directing cosmic disasters, withdrew cravenly to the higher heavens. 
The image of them crouching 'like dogs' against the outer wall of Anu's 
most distant Heaven is a telling one. 

Ziusudra is rewarded with immortality by the now calmer gods, a state 
which is to be shared by his wife, a peculiarly thoughtful touch. They are 
translated to 'the land of crossing', Dilmun: 

Ziusudra, the King 

Prostrated himself before Anu and Enlil. 
Anu and Enlil cherished Ziusudra, 
Like that of a god they gave him, 

Breath eternal like that of a god they bring down for him 
Then Ziusudra the King, 

The preserver of the name of vegetation and of the seed of mankind 
In the land of crossing, the land of Dilmun, the place where the sun 
rises they caused to dwell. 11 

In some versions of the myth, Ziusudra is said to be placed by the gods in 
a mysterious land 'at the mouth of the rivers'. 12 It had generally been thought 
that this location must be somewhere near the outflow of the Tigris and 
Euphrates into the Gulf through the marshlands near the Shatt al Arab. 
However, some light may be thrown on this typically vague piece of Sumerian 
geographical description by the fact that local legend in Bahrain and on the 
Arabian mainland maintains that the sea's freshwater springs, which feature 
later in Gilgamesh's story, are the 'subterranean mouths' of the two rivers. 
This they are not: but it is certainly possible that the legend persisting today 
descends from very ancient times and that it was to these springs that the 
Ziusudra legend refers, when it speaks of 'the mouth of the rivers' as the 
eternal home of the justified king of Shuruppak — and Bahrain means, in 
Arabic, 'the two seas'. 

Gilgamesh goes out to search for Dilmun, for nowhere is it more likely 
that he will find the secret of eternal life than there, a land blessed by the 
gods, ruled by the one man who has already been transformed by them into 
an immortal. He travels by foot from his city, alone and meeting more 

308 



GILGAMESH, THE GULF AND THE LAND OF THE LIVING 

adventures on the way, including an encounter with a sort of celestial hostess, 
Siduri, who urges Gilgamesh to forget his concern for man's condition and 
to eat, drink and be merry. 

Gilgamesh, whither rovest thou? 

The Life thou pursuest thou shalt not find 

When the gods created mankind 

Death for mankind they set aside 

Life in their own hands retaining. 

Thus Gilgamesh let full be thy belly 

Make thou merry by day and by night, 

Of each day make thou a feast of rejoicing, 

Day and night dance thou and play! 

Let thy garments be sparkling fresh, 

Thy head be washed; bathe thou in water 

Pay heed to the little one that holds on to thy hand 

Let thy spouse delight in thy bosom! 

For this is the task of mankind. 13 

Siduri is an intriguing, enigmatic character. The Gulf in ancient times 
was well populated with goddesses; Siduri is, by any standards, one of its 
principal divinities. She lives on an island at the edge of the Ocean, that 
mysterious generalization for all unknown seas. Her land is a garden in 
which the Sun walks in the mornings: the trees bear jewels. Siduri has 
sisters, or perhaps the other goddesses are really herself in other guises. 
One of them, Sinara, is described as the goddess of the Gulf, given charge 
of it by the Lord Enki himself. Lakhamum is conflated with Sarpanit of 
Dilmun 14 and is represented bearing the scales of a mermaid or a fish- 
goddess. Then there are the several goddesses associated with holy Dilmun: 
Ninsikilla, the Lady of Pure Decrees and spouse to Enki, and Ninhursag, 
the great goddess whose terrible epiphany brought death near to Enki, are 
but two of them. 

Siduri survived her encounter with Gilgamesh to become, in Hellenistic 
times, the Erythraean Sibyl. She was then represented, anachronistically, as 
the daughter of Berossus, the Chaldaean historian whose Babyloniaca 
contained the weird story of the appearance in the Gulf in legendary times 
of the apkallu, the part-men part-fish who brought the arts of civilization to 
the black-headed folk of Sumer. 15 

After his meeting with Siduri, Gilgamesh continues on his way: he meets 
sinister scorpion men, the guardians of the Gates of Yesterday and Tomorrow 
(also known as the Keepers of the Place of Sunrise), and is fearful of them: 
they warn him that no one has accomplished the journey which he has set 
himself. He meets Shamash and even the god is awed by Gilgamesh's 
presumption: 

309 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Shamash was distraught, as he betook himself to him; 

He says to Gilgamesh 

'Gilgamesh, whither rovest thou? 

The life thou pursuest thou shalt not find. 

Gilgamesh says to him, to valiant Shamash: 

'After marching [and] roving over the steppe, 

Must I lay my head in the hearth of the earth 

That I may sleep through all the years? 

Let mine eyes behold the sun that I may have my fill of the light! 

Darkness withdraws when there is enough light. 

May one who indeed is dead behold yet the radiance of the sun!' 16 

But Gilgamesh is not to be turned from his course: he crosses the marshlands 
and reaches what must be the head of the Arabian Gulf. There he summons 
Ziusudra's boatman to take him to Dilmun. It is clear that Gilgamesh intended 
to make the journey by water, suggesting that by the time this element of the 
story had been taking into the myth, the insular Dilmun, the Bahrain islands, 
was intended as the object of Gilgamesh's journey. Ziusudra's boatman is a 
mysterious character, whose responsibility, like Charon's in Greek mythology, 
is to ferry the dead to Paradise. He agrees to carry Gilgamesh across the 
waters of death which separate Dilmun from the living world. However, it is 
essential that Gilgamesh shall not touch the waters and Sursunabi instructs 
him to cut 120 poles 60 cubits in length to punt the boat (the Sumerian cubit 
was just under 50 centimetres long). This generous allocation of gigantic 
poles, each one about 30 metres long, is necessary so that Gilgamesh may let 
each one fall back into the sea of death; thus he will avoid touching the 
lethal waters. 

The journey according to the Epic might reasonably be expected to take 
a month and fifteen days; Gilgamesh and Sursunabi, however, reach Dilmun 
in three days, a testimony to Gilgamesh's more than human qualities. In fact, 
three days is about the time it would have taken a ship of Sumerian times to 
sail from the head of the Gulf to Bahrain. 

As the boat approaches Dilmun, Ziusudra is watching from the shore; at 
once he recognizes that Gilgamesh is no man of his, for Gilgamesh is living. 
It is of some significance that the Epic makes this point, the recognition by 
Ziusudra that the figure standing in Sursunabi's boat is untouched by death 
and thus is not truly ready to be brought to his (and Dilmun's) shores. This 
suggests, however tentatively, that the place to which Ziusudra had been 
transported was a place to which others were to be brought; since they had 
to cross the waters of death to reach it, it may be presumed that they, too, 
were dead. This may be an echo of the belief which gave occasion to Dilmun's 
sepulchral reputation. The deeply evocative concept of the 'island of the 
dead' which so haunted the imagination of nineteenth-century Romantic 
artists may have had its remote beginnings here. Boeklin's celebrated painting, 

310 



GILGAMESH, THE GULF AND THE LAND OF THE LIVING 

transposed to the blood-warm waters of the Gulf, may lose something of its 
mournful, cypress-haunted solemnity but it gains in antiquity. 

Ziusudra welcomes Gilgamesh, but asks the reason for his mournful 
appearance; Gilgamesh at once rehearses the story of Enkidu's death and 
their love for one another, his fears of his own dissolution and his quest for 
immortality. He realizes that unless he finds the secret, one day soon he too 
will die and be laid in the earth for ever. He pleads with Ziusudra to tell him 
how he may find the eternal life which he has dedicated himself to seeking, 
enduring all hardships and tribulations in the quest for it. Ziusudra is emphatic 
and discouraging: 

There is no permanence. Do we build a house to stand for ever, do 
we seal a contract to keep for ever, does the flood of rivers endure? It 
is only the nymph of the dragonfly who sheds her larva and sees the 
sun in his glory. From the days of old there is no permanence. The 
sleeping and the dead, how alike they are, they are like a painted 
death. What is there between the master and the servant when both 
have fulfilled their doom? When the Annunaki, the judges come 
together, and Mammetum the mother of destinies, together they decree 
the fates of men. Life and death they allot but the day of death they 
do not disclose. 17 

Yet Ziusudra is the only mortal to escape the universal fate of mankind; to 
explain this destiny he begins to tell the weary Gilgamesh of the story of the 
Flood and his part in it. What Ziusudra, presumably delighted to have a new 
audience for the recital of his life-story, has to tell him seems to have little 
relevance to Gilgamesh's problems, except perhaps to demonstrate that the 
king of Shuruppak was merely fulfilling the role which destiny and the gods 
had determined for him. 

"When his recital is finished, Ziusudra puts Gilgamesh to another test; all 
he needs to do to become immortal, he tells him, is to resist sleep for six days 
and seven nights. Gilgamesh tries his best, but wearied by his journeys, and 
in all probability by the story of the Deluge, he falls asleep. So tired is he 
that, far from remaining awake for seven nights, he sleeps for all that time, 
outside Ziusudra's reed hut in Dilmun. 

The immortal, who has watched over him with affectionate compassion, 
wakens him at last and Gilgamesh, endearingly and wholly in character, 
cries that he had only just dropped off into a light sleep. Gently Ziusudra 
tells him it is not so, and the realization that he cannot resist even the little 
death of sleep brings panic and despair to Gilgamesh. 'Already', he says, 'the 
thief in the night has hold of my limbs, death inhabits my room: wherever 
my foot rests I find death.' 

Ziusudra offers Gilgamesh some consolation, but it is tinged with irony, 
for if he cannot give him eternal life he can give him a new set of clothes 

311 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

which will keep their pristine quality until he returns to his own city. Sometimes 
even mere possessions outlive their owners. 

Gilgamesh is about to leave Dilmun and return despondently home to 
Uruk, when Ziusudra's wife prompts her husband to reveal one mystery of 
the island to him. At its revelation Gilgamesh becomes greatly excited, for it 
seems to be the very object of his quest. Under the water, Ziusudra tells him, 
there grows a plant, similar to the buckthorn, which if plucked will bring the 
possessor the return of lost youth. At once Gilgamesh joyously prepares to 
set off in search of it convinced, mistakenly, that it is the secret of immortality 
that awaits his grasp. 

At this point in the narrative, the story-teller comments specifically that it 
is a sweet-water current that bears Gilgamesh to the sea-bed where the plant 
grows. He weights himself by tying heavy stones to his feet in the way which 
is the practice of the pearl-fishers of the Bahrain seas to this day. It seems not 
impossible that it might have been one of the sea's freshwater springs that 
carried Gilgamesh down to find the flower of restored youth. 

These springs, it has already been remarked, are a peculiar feature of the 
seas around Bahrain, fountains of brackish water which burst up surprisingly 
from the shallows about a kilometre and a half offshore. It is clear from the 
poem that Gilgamesh is in the sea, for it is stated that when he picked the 
flower he cut the weighted stones from his feet 'and the sea carried him and 
threw him on the shore'. 

The actual nature of the 'plant' that Gilgamesh seeks is unknown. One 
possibility is that it is the coral which is the object of his quest. 18 Coral grows 
abundantly in the Gulf; its phosphorescence has already been referred to in 
connection with Gilgamesh's encounter with Siduri. One of the candidates 
for the place where Gilgamesh plunged into the sea must be Fasht Khor, off 
the north shore of the principal island, for there is located a substantial 
freshwater spring which forces its way up out of the seabed itself. 

Now Gilgamesh reveals one of the traits of his nature which may have 
caused him to be so loved by his people while he was king of Uruk and 
which ensured that the recollection of him grew over the centuries until he 
assumed heroic and semi-divine proportions in the memory of the generations 
that delighted in his story. Excitedly he shows the magic plant to Ziusudra's 
ferryman; he announces that he will return to Uruk with it and there give it 
to the old men to eat that they may become young again. Only when the old 
men are restored will he, the king, eat it himself. 

Gilgamesh leaves the house of Ziusudra on the shores of Dilmun and 
begins his journey home, bearing his magic plant and accompanied by 
Sursunabi, who has been banished from Dilmun for bringing a mortal to its 
shores; but he is now Gilgamesh's friend. This time, presumably because 
Sursunabi has had his boat taken away from him, they are on foot. But 
Sursunabi is something more than a simple boatman, a Sumerian Charon 
ferrying the dead to Dilmun. He is a member indeed of the principal family 

312 



GILGAMESH, THE GULF AND THE LAND OF THE LIVING 

of gods, for he married the daughter of the great god, Enki of the Abyss; his 
name, it has been suggested, means 'Servant of Enki'. Thus Enki's dominion 
over Dilmun is again demonstrated by the presence of his henchman. 

After a while upon their journey, they stop by a cool and inviting pool. 
Gilgamesh flings off the splendid clothes given him by Ziusudra and plunges 
in, leaving the precious flower of youth on the bank. 

Deep in the pool, a serpent lives. Disturbed by Gilgamesh splashing joyfully 
above it, the serpent rises to the surface and smells the sweetness of the 
magic plant. Quickly it rears out of the water, seizes the plant, swallows it, 
and at once sloughs its skin, the invariable sign of the snake's immortality in 
the eyes of the ancients. 

Thus destiny and the gods played their final deception upon Gilgamesh. 
He wept by the waters, mourning now not only Enkidu and his own certain 
dissolution, but also the hopelessness of his quest and the wreck of his 
hopes to change man's destiny. 

In Bahrain near the north-east end of the island is the Pool of Adari; 
though there is not the slightest evidence to warrant it, it is pleasant to think 
of it as the place where Gilgamesh, having pitted himself as the champion of 
mortal man against the fates, was finally conquered. Today it is a happier 
place, full of boys bathing, few of whom have ever thought of the king who 
might have bathed there before them. 

The pool is a few kilometres to the south of the two principal Sumerian- 
connected sites in Bahrain, Barbar and Qala'at al-Bahrain. Offshore, about a 
kilometre and a half due north of Barbar lies another of the freshwater springs 
which bubble up from the seabed, called al-Sharaiba in Arabic. It is tempting 
to place all the main events of Gilgamesh's visit to Dilmun in this corner of 
the island. Adari, incidentally, was probably a place of ritual sacrifice in pre- 
Lslamic times, for in Arabic the word means 'virgin' and this suggests that an 
ill-fortuned girl was once marked out as an offering to the island's divinities, 
and cast into its depths. To this day popular belief in Bahrain insists that a 
serpent in Adari pool demands an annual sacrifice and that every year a 
swimmer will be drowned there. 

But there is another possibility: in some versions of the myth Gilgamesh is 
said to have bathed in a well. Given the frequently recorded practice of 
goddesses bathing their heads in wells or fountains, this seems a reasonable 
possibility. There was a well, clearly of some ritual importance, in the temple 
site at Barbar. 

A recurring factor in mythology and ancient belief has appeared in the 
Epic at this point in the form of the serpent which stole Gilgamesh's hope of 
eternal youth. Snakes were sacred from the earliest times and the serpent 
was as frequently a creature of good omen as it was of evil, for it was one of 
the attendants of the ambiguous Great Mother, the original divine creative 
force recognized and worshipped by man from Upper Palaeolithic times 
onwards. The serpent that played so deplorable a part in the Garden of Eden 

313 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

was almost certainly Sumerian or Babylonian in its mythical origins, though 
the Biblical story was probably based upon a misunderstanding of the original 
source. A snake cult was still maintained in Bahrain 1,000 years after the time 
from which the earliest versions of the Epic of Gilgamesh dates and 2,000 
years after the events which it describes. 

Gilgamesh returned to Uruk with the knowledge that man's life is destined 
to be brief and that there is no escaping the ultimate summons of death and 
the rule of the Iggigi, the dark and terrible gods who were the judges of the 
Underworld. However, he finds some cause for pride in his city and he 
points out to Sursunabi (for he has befriended the now unemployed boatman) 
the high ramparted walls he has built of burnt brick, dependable and strong, 
and the orchards and temple lands which march with the city's limits. At least 
his life has not been wholly wasted if he can build a strong city and bring 
good government to his state; is he not Gilgamesh, the king, the shepherd of 
his people? 

Go up and walk upon the wall of Uruk, 
Inspect the base terrace, examine the brickwork, 
Is not its brickwork of burnt brick? 19 

At length the number of Gilgamesh's days in Uruk are realized; still 
protesting against his fate and the fate of all men, he dies and must descend 
into the sombre underworld of the spirits. His people prepare a solemn 
funeral for him, for the panoply of death is as splendid as that which marks 
the progress of a living king. The young Gilgamesh, wild and insatiable, is 
forgotten and only the royal shepherd who suffered much for his people is 
remembered. Gilgamesh the king who was enjoined by Enlil, the master of 
the gods, to deal justly before the face of the sun, is taken to his tomb lamented 
by all the people of the city: 

The King has laid himself down and will not rise again 

The Lord of Kullun will not rise again; 

He overcame evil, he will not come again 

Though he was strong of arm he will not rise again 

He had wisdom and a comely face, he will not come again 

He is gone into the mountain, he will not come again 

From the couch of many colours he will not come again. 20 

The foundations of the walls of Uruk, so proudly acclaimed by Gilgamesh, 
may still be made out and they are nearly 10 kilometres (6 miles) in 
circumference. 21 The city itself has become a mound raked over earnestly by 
archaeologists, the splendour of its temples and towers reconstructed from 
fragments and impressions in the Mesopotamian soil. But Gilgamesh has 
achieved eternal life, at least to our day and, it is to be hoped, for as long as 

314 



GILGAMESH, THE GULF AND THE LAND OF THE LIVING 

men are moved by heroes and the sagas of their exploits. And surely he 
warrants such remembrance, for he symbolizes man's protest against the 
little time which he is allowed to wander in the garden of this world and his 
eternal struggle against the harsh lottery of the gods. 

It would be foolish to try to trace too literally, step by step, Gilgamesh's 
journey to Dilmun. The voyage described in the Epic may well not be capable 
of being placed in any real location at all; for all we know today, it may be 
astronomical, cosmological or purely fictional. 

The majesty of the myth and its expression through the medium of the 
Epic is, however, neither increased by being rooted in place or time nor 
diminished by not being so. It is part of the universal heritage and its real 
significance in the present context is that the culmination of Gilgamesh's 
journey is sought for and, in a sense, fulfilled in Dilmun's land, which in this 
case lies beyond the borderlands of reality. Again, it is the faery quality of 
Dilmun which pervades those parts of the Epic which touch it. 

So many strands of myth run into this most ancient of all sacred lands that 
those of Gilgamesh's story are only part of the warp and woof of the Dilmun 
tapestry. The gods cluster around Dilmun as once they were said to cluster, 
like flies, around Ziusudra's sacrifices after the Flood, and, in addition to 
Gilgamesh, the most splendid among heroes, there is a significant company 
of other heroic figures whose stories, like his, find much of their expression 
in Dilmun and the lands of the Gulf. The heroes, passing in review, are the 
Lord Enki, Oannes, Ziusudra, Al-Khidr and Alexander. 

These heroic figures are a special element in the Gulf's mythology. Thus 
Gilgamesh and his counterpart, Alexander, distant in time but comparable in 
their heroic status and enduring legend, are not alone as the most powerful 
figures who bridge the realms of myth and reality. Enki himself is there, the 
most puissant of divinities, who has his alter ego in Oannes, part-man, part- 
fish, the aquatic didact after whose time no new knowledge had been imparted 
to mankind. Ziusudra, too, must qualify as an heroic figure, certainly as 
someone more than mortal. But there is another still more mysterious being, 
who enters the story of the Place of the Two Seas and who may subsume all 
of these mighty entities — at least in the version of his legend with which we 
are dealing — in his own shadowy self, one of the most complex and mysterious 
figures in Near Eastern myth. 

The myth relates the activities of one of Al-Khidr, the Green One. Al- 
Khidr features in the archaeology of the Gulf by virtue of a shrine dedicated 
to him on Failaka island, close to the site excavated by the Danes. The shrine 
and the legends which attend it have been obscured by Bibby; it is obviously 
of considerable antiquity, demonstrated by the mound on which the present 
shrine stands. 

The shrine is particularly venerated by the Shi'ite sect of Islam, the second 
great stream of dogma and practice of the Faith of which the orthodox Sunni 
branch is the larger part, dominant on the Arabian shores of the Gulf. Kuwait 

315 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

is overwhelmingly Sunni in observance but respect for belief, even if it may 
appear to be heterodox, prevents any interference with a shrine sacred even 
to a small minority. Thus the shrine of Al-Khidr is not available for the probings 
of archaeologists, a triumph for Faith if a loss for knowledge. There can be 
little doubt that the site would repay excavation, for it has obviously been a 
sacred place over many millennia: indeed, it is likely that its position today 
is a consequence of the ancient concept that certain points on the earth's 
surface were immemorially sacred and hence were for ever consecrated to a 
divinity. Thus did the ziggurat originate in Sumerian cities and no doubt, if it 
were possible to penetrate the lower levels of Al-Khidr's Failaka shrine, 
evidence would be found of its own origin; it might even reveal who, and 
what, Al-Khidr was. 

In Islamic lore Al-Khidr is an intriguing figure; he has no precise analogy 
in Christian or Jewish mythology. In the Quran it is never clear exactly what 
Al-Khidr is, other than that he is a messenger and a servant of God (like 
Sursanabi, who was a servant of Enki); he is, presumably, a spirit who, since 
he is visible to men, can assume human form. He is one of the agents of the 
divine power and is himself something of an elemental force, with much of 
the apparent capriciousness and unpredictability of a primaeval divinity. 

Al-Khidr is the protagonist of one of the most remarkable, complex and 
disturbing Surahs (chapters) of the Quran. This is Surah 18, commonly titled 
The Cave. 22 

The Cave contains many different elements: stories, precepts and 
injunctions, as well as the account of Moses' meeting with and attachment to 
Al-Khidr. Al-Khidr is never named as such in the Quranic accounts; he is 
called 'one of Our Servants to whom we have vouchsafed Our mercy and 
whom we had endowed with knowledge of Our own'. But all the 
commentaries agree that it is Al-Khidr's intervention in human affairs, an 
intervention wholly countenanced by God, that is described in the episode. 

The Cave is many-levelled; the Surah begins with the sequence which 
gives it its name, but which is not immediately relevant to our purpose here. 
It relates the story of the Seven Sleepers (and their dog) who, in the Quranic 
version of a widespread myth, are boys who fall asleep for an unknown time 
in the depths of the cave. When this story is told the Surah goes on to warn 
of the catastrophes which await the nations of unbelievers and wrongdoers; 
then, suddenly, Moses appears and an entirely different narrative begins. It 
is at this point that The Cave begins to assume a particular significance and 
interest in the context of the Gulf. It must, however, be remembered that the 
account belongs essentially to the realm of legend; nothing is precise and 
clearly defined but all is hazy and allusive. The Cave has much of the quality 
of a dream sequence. 

Moses announces to his servant that he plans to journey to 'the place 
where two seas meet'. It must be said that traditionally the commentaries on 
the Quran have always assumed the objective of Moses' journey to have 

316 



GILGAMESH, THE GULF AND THE LAND OF THE LIVING 

been Suez where two seas, the Red Sea and the Mediterranean, may be said 
to meet. 23 However, modern scholarship has tended to suggest that the Quran 
means precisely what it says and that it is to 'the place of the two seas'; that 
is, to Bahrain in the Gulf, that Moses directs his wanderings. 

Moses is himself attended by a servant whose name, in the commentaries 
on the Quran, is Joshua son of Nun. Joshua is Jesus; Nun is the Deep, the 
primaeval waters. He is also sometimes identified as a fish. Thus all the 
elements in the story of Al-Khidr constantly run together in the most intriguing 
"way. 

Moses and his servant journey on together, and the Quran reads: 'But 
when they came at last to the place where the two seas met, they forgot their 
fish, which made its way into the water, swimming at will.' The loss of the 
fish, a miraculous creature evidently, which has not been referred to before 
in the account, is not realized by Moses until he asks his servant for food. 
The servant admits the loss of the fish; Moses recognizes that the event is a 
miraculous one and 'they return by the way they came' — presumably once 
more to the place where the two seas meet. Here they find the Servant of 
God — was he perhaps the fish, disguised? Recognizing him for what he is, 
Moses begs to be permitted to follow him that he may learn from his wisdom. 
The Servant of God warns Moses that he will find it difficult to bear with him 
and with the accession of knowledge which is beyond him; Moses insists, 
however, and they set off together. 

Then follow three episodes in each of which Al-Khidr carries out an action 
which appears to Moses to be either malignant or inexplicable. In the first 
Al-Khidr bores a hole in the bottom of the boat in which they are travelling 
and sinks it; in the second they meet a youth on the road and at once Al- 
Khidr kills him; in the third they find a wall on the point of collapse and Al- 
Khidr restores it, but seeks no payment for doing so. 

Moses has promised Al-Khidr not to question his acts, but cannot contain 
his bewilderment at what Al-Khidr does, so perplexing do his actions seem 
to be. At each event, therefore, Moses (who in this episode is presented as a 
rather frivolous and irresponsible chatterer) demands an explanation from 
Al-Khidr, only apologizing abjectly as, each time, the Servant reminds him of 
their bargain. Al-Khidr, when he is pressed by Moses, now warns him that 
they must part but first he explains each of his strange proceedings. He 
knew that an enemy was in pursuit of the boat in which they were travelling 
so, to thwart him, he scuttled it. The boy he killed was the only son of his 
parents, true believers to whom the boy would bring much distress by reason 
of the sinful life which Al-Khidr knew lay in his future; he would beg his 
Lord to give them another, more pious son whose worth would bring them 
joy. The wall he rebuilt, because beneath it was buried a treasure which 
belonged to two orphan boys, which they would find when they grew to 
manhood and could protect it. All these events were directed, not by Al- 
Khidr's will but by the will of God. 

317 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Apart from his appearance in The Cave Al-Khidr is an important figure in 
popular Muslim and Near Eastern myth. Sometimes he is said to be the son 
of Adam: sometimes his true name is given as Elijah. On occasion he is 
identified with St George. 24 As well as being a contemporary both of Moses 
and of Alexander, he is said to have been living in the time of Abraham. He 
lives, variously, on an island or on a green carpet in the midst of the sea. In 
some of the legends associated with the life of Alexander he is the commander 
of the king's vanguard, his vizier, even his cousin, certainly his friend. They 
journey together to the spring of life and Al-Khidr discovers a miraculous 
well. 25 

Al-Khidr is said to worship God on an island. By his association with 
islands he is taken to be the patron of seamen and seafaring folk; indeed, on 
the sea he is said to be God's 'Khalifa' or successor. In India he is a river-god, 
a spirit of wells and streams who is portrayed seated on a fish. One of his 
principal shrines is on an island in the Indus river. He can find water below 
ground and speaks the languages of all peoples. He is a particular friend of 
the archangel Raphael and his name is even substituted sometimes for that 
of the still greater Michael. 

After relating the story of the three episodes involving Al-Khidr and Moses, 
The Cave abruptly changes the course of its narrative once again. Al-Khidr 
and Moses vanish, to be replaced by yet another powerful figure in Islamic 
lore, Dhul-Qarnein, the Two-Horned One. 

There is general agreement among the commentators as to the identity of 
Dhul-Qarnein; to their collective mind he is Alexander, son of Philip, king of 
Macedon and customarily surnamed the Great. Alexander's legend lives on 
fervently in the Near and Middle East, even to this day; he is, moreover, 
enshrined in the Quran as one chosen by God and particularly favoured by 
Him. In The Cave we learn that Dhul-Qarnein is given by God the rulership 
over many peoples. He journeys to the west where he sees the sun setting in 
a pool of black mud and to the east where he builds a rampart of iron and 
molten brass against the depredations of those two familiar figures in the 
mythology of London, Gog and Magog, who, perhaps rather surprisingly, 
make their appearance here. Then the Two-Horned One in turn disappears 
and the narrative of The Cave is concluded. 

The Cave is a text of great subtlety and complexity; to unravel all of its 
many strands would require the invention of a Quranic scholar of deep 
learning and skill. However, it may be possible to detect one or two more 
elements which are relevant to the larger theme and which contribute to an 
understanding of the importance of myth in the development of the Gulf's 
historical character. 

C.G.Jung, the most perceptive magus of our century, who probed deeply 
into the nature and structure of myth, chose Al-Khidr as one of his 'four 
archetypes'. 26 For Jung, Al-Khidr stood for the figure of the Trickster, the 
almost elemental and catalytic force which produces effects but conceals 

318 



GILGAMESH, THE GULF AND THE LAND OF THE LIVING 

their (and his) reality. Thus, nothing is wholly what it seems to be under Al- 
Khidr's dispensation and the victim of his wiles must be careful neither to 
seek for premature understanding of what his actions mean nor to attribute 
to them solutions which are rooted simply in what seems to be. 

A better candidate than Al-Khidr for the Trickster would, however, surely 
be Enki himself, the wise divinity who, by a cunning device, saved the race 
of men from the Flood and the misdirected wrath of the other gods; often in 
his dealings with his fellow divinities Enki adopted subterfuge and displayed 
a predilection for obscuring the reality of his actions. Jung probably did not 
know of Enki's existence when he was considering the origins of myth. 
Then the Greek and Hebrew legends, with the addition of the occasional 
Egyptian example, were considered to be formative to man's developing 
consciousness. The immensely more ancient Akkadian and, more ancient 
still, Sumerian myths were then largely unknown. It is interesting to speculate 
what Jung might have made of them had he known of their existence, in the 
form in which they are understood today. Had he known Enki, the god's 
enigmatic and ambiguous nature could hardly have failed to intrigue him. 

It is reasonable to assume that the story of Moses and Al-Khidr takes place 
in the Gulf waters where the two seas meet, somewhere therefore in the 
general location of Bahrain, perhaps on the Arabian mainland rather than on 
the island. The miraculous fish and the appearance of Nun recall the fish 
cults which are known to have been a feature of early religious practice in 
Sumer as witnessed by the evidence of such cults in the earliest shrines at 
Eridu. Enki's priests were often represented wearing a sort of fish costume, 
emphasizing the god's concern with the creatures of the deep. 

A popular myth of great antiquity, still current in Bahrain in this century, 
has a giant striding up the Gulf, its waters only up to his ankles, who reaches 
down into the water to take a fish for his meal. Having caught it, he holds it 
up against the sun to grill it. Clearly the giant is another fish-connected wonder- 
worker, still haunting these waters. His name is Ishnaq bin Inak and it 
obviously recalls, over these several thousand years, Enki and his son, Enshag 
or Inzak. 27 

The Two-Horned One is Alexander as he is most frequently portrayed on 
his coinage, after his coronation as King of Egypt. He is shown, often in 
Herakles' lion-skins, wearing the horned head-dress by which his descent 
from ram-headed Amon, the ruler of the Egyptian pantheon in his day, is 
portrayed. But horned men and horned gods are powerful symbols from 
long before Alexander's time, particularly in Mesopotamia and the Gulf; it 
should not be forgotten that Moses himself is often portrayed wearing the 
ram's horns, particularly in mediaeval iconography. Horned men abound in 
the seals of the Gulf, particularly those from Failaka island. 

Of the real nature of both cult and myth we can only guess. Indeed, the 
whole of this topic is essentially speculative but it seems not impossible that 
the elements of fish, horned divinity and sacred king may suggest that Al- 

319 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Khidr, who is the common denominator of them all, may in reality be Enki, 
the benign god of Dilmun and Eridu, on the one hand; and at the other end 
of the chronological sequence with which we are concerned, he emerged as 
the figure of Alexander Dhul-Qarnein, when he assumed legendary 
proportions and the status of universal myth. Many of the aspects of 
Alexander's legends recall those of Gilgamesh, who is thus further brought 
into the equation. But the appeal which Gilgamesh has exerted on the world 
over the forty-five centuries which divide his time from the present day is 
that he represents one of the most enduring archetypes of man in historical 
time, the hero who sets out on a quest and, despite sufferings and all the 
odds agains him, endures. That Gilgamesh failed in his quest only adds 
another dimension to his essential humanity. 



320 



11 

THE ENIGMA OF DILMUN 



Over 100 years of archaeology in the Gulf and Bahrain have revealed much 
about the material culture which flourished in the centuries during which 
the archipelago of islands was the heart of the far-famed land of Dilmun. 1 
The post-war period has provided at least the beginnings of an understanding 
of the part played by the lands of eastern Arabia and Oman in the development 
of a Gulf -wide culture over the past fifty or so centuries. But two fundamental 
questions remain as inpenetrably unanswered as ever they were: 

Who were the Dilmunites and where did they come from? 

We are reasonably certain that the Dilmunites were not Phoenicians; we 
are by no means certain now that the Phoenicians were not Dilmunites. 2 
There is no evidence that the Dilmunites were Sumerians, though the destinies 
of the two peoples were closely linked. We do not know what was the 
language of Dilmun. That inscriptions in most of the historic languages 
associated with the region have been found either in the insular or the 
continental Dilmun (the islands or the mainland) prove only that Dilmun 
had contact with the peoples of many lands and that, in all probability, 
people to whom these languages were native resided there. 

We may be reasonably sure that there would have been a significant 
component in the Dilmunite stock drawn from the proto- Arabians (if such a 
term may be permitted) who inhabited the eastern part of the Arabian 
peninsula in the historic period and who probably had done so since the 
earliest times of human settlement or occupation. 3 These were the relatives 
of the Mar-tu, the Ahlamu and eventually of the Arameans; they tended, all 
of them, to have connections with the Western Semitic linguistic groups but 
whether the Dilmunites spoke a Western Semitic tongue, in post-Sumerian 
times, must be considerably in doubt. 

We do not know what a Dilmunite looked like. We do not know what his 
customs of dress were, other than the odd fragments of jewellery which 
have survived. We do have the mildly satisfying information that the reputation 
of Dilmun as a particularly favourable place in which to live seems to have 

321 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

been borne out by the fact that the Dilmunites' skeletal remains show them 
to have been rather taller, better built and somewhat longer living than the 
average of their contemporaries. 4 

On the matter of the origins of the Dilmun civilization, it may now just be 
possible to discern some tentative landmarks through the haze which 
surrounds them, which may in time lead to their fuller recognition. Even 
this, however, will not necessarily tell us all that we would wish to know 
about the Dilmunites themselves, though it may begin to suggest at least 
some associations for them. 

It now appears more and more likely that the essential impetus which led, 
in the later centuries of the third millennium, to the establishment of what 
was evidently a rich and sophisticated society on the principal Bahrain island, 
came from the south and east. 5 There are more and more hints of connections 
in the third millennium between the island of Bahrain and what is today the 
Sultanate of Oman, particularly its northern reaches and beyond Oman to 
the Indus Valley and its coastal regions. There is no doubt also, that, as 
matters stand at present, the settlements in Oman are earlier in date than the 
earliest so far known in Bahrain. 

There is a curious chronological hiatus in Bahrain's archaeology, which 
in effect seems to mean that between the late Ubaid period in the fourth 
millennium BC and the latter part of the third millennium, a gap of several 
hundred years, there was apparently no significant settlement in the Bahrain 
islands. Since the Mesopotamians of the earlier period evidently had some 
contact with the eastern Arabian seaboard and since people using Ubaid 
pottery landed on Qatar, on the little offshore island to Bahrain, which is 
now the inland site of Al-Markh, and down the Gulf at several points on the 
coast, this is puzzling. In particular it is odd that Bahrain itself does not 
appear to have been visited. 

It is the more strange since the holy character of Dilmun-Bahrain seems to 
be bound up with its insular nature and clearly it is strongly identified in the 
minds of the Sumerians with the origins of their society. It is considered the 
place where many of the benefits of civilization originated: this ought to 
refer, in terms of the Sumerians' own chronology, to some time in the middle 
of the fourth millennium. 

The Sumerians were certainly capable of sailing the Gulf's waters as early as 
this. We can presume that they did so in pursuit of the raw materials which 
they so earnestly sought in lands far from their own home. The conversion of 
copper was very ancient; by the late fourth millennium it was a familiar medium 
and by the early third its use was virtually industrialized. Oman represents the 
most convenient source of copper that the Sumerians could tap, but nonetheless 
it is about 1,000 kilometres distant from the most southerly Sumerian settlement. 
The odds against their finding it accidentally must be formidable; the idea 
cannot be wholly discarded, therefore, that the Sumerians themselves did 
come up the Gulf from the south, perhaps from Oman itself or somewhere 

322 



THE ENIGMA OF DILMUN 

near to it and brought with them the knowledge of its resources. As was proposed 
earlier, the affection in which they seem always to have held Dilmun-Bahrain 
may have originated because it sheltered them on their northward journey. In 
which case, why did they apparently delay establishing the temples (if they 
are, in any real sense, Sumerian) at Barbar until virtually the end of the Sumerian 
period? Or are there still earlier shrines awaiting discovery? 

It would seem that the Sumerians either maintained contact with or 
themselves established bases on the eastern Arabian seaboard. They could 
hardly have failed to be aware of Bahrain's existence, yet apparently they 
did not use the island during the time of their own greatest prosperity and 
creative outpourings. 

It may be that the explanation lies in the erratic character of the Gulf itself 
over this period. The Gulf is significantly lower today than it was in the 
fourth and early third millennia; it is conceivable that any early settlements 
that there might have been were built of very fragile materials, such as burasti, 
and simply perished. The sites themselves would be beyond the original 
shorelines and may now be buried beneath wind-blown sand, a substantial 
distance inland. But, despite the many surveys which have been undertaken 
of Bahrain's land surface over the past thirty years, no trace of earlier 
settlements has, in fact, been found. 

The extensive structures at Barbar which still wait for the spade of the 
archaeologist (and for the even more sophisticated survey equipment which 
he has at his disposal today) could well reveal earlier evidence than has so 
far been the case. Indeed, it would be very surprising if they did not. The 
architecture of Barbar is strange, taken in the context of the presumed Sumerian 
associations of the rites practised there. The architecture, of finely dressed 
stone blocks, is distinctly un-Sumerian; in what architectural tradition therefore 
did the builders of Barbar work? 

Similarly, who were the builders of the great tomb at Hili, with its carved 
decoration? Were they perhaps the precursors of the architects of Barbar? 

Whether the discovery of fourth- or early third-millennium remains on 
Bahrain would resolve the long-disputed matter of the Sumerians' own origins 
is another matter altogether. Perhaps it will; certainly no one seems inclined 
nowadays to suggest any convincing alternative, so a southerly approach 
may be at least as defensible as any other and more so than most. If, in the 
closing pages of a book which has tried to take a broad-based but reasonably 
objective view of the evidence of the past of this region, it were permissible 
to speculate, then there is one prospect which teases the imagination, once 
it is planted there. 

In late Neolithic times, between 7,000 and 6,000 years ago, the Gulf and 
the eastern reaches of the Arabian peninsula presented a markedly different 
appearance from its present-day topography. With the level of the Gulf 
significantly higher, by as much as 2 metres, the sea reached far into parts of 
the coastal area and beyond, which are now well removed from it. 

323 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

Al-Markh would have been only one of many such little islands, strung 
along the coast; Umm an-Nar, off the northern coast of the Omani peninsula, 
was another. The sea ran deep into the Empty Quarter, ar-Rub'al-Khali, and 
into the Omani desert. The little communities of hunters who lived on the 
edges of the lakes which were formed along the desert's perimeter and who 
subsisted on the larger game which the region could then support were, by 
the evidence of their stone tools, talented craftsmen; we do not know what 
other products they produced since these would have been made from 
perishable materials. As the sea withdrew and the desert supervened, this 
people must have been driven away to find a new homeland. As they were 
lake-dwellers, they were probably competent boatmen; the Gulf (which would 
hardly have been recognizable to them as such) would not have represented 
any insuperable barrier to their movement; rather, indeed, the opposite. 

As the environment changed, the lake-dwellers may have moved eastwards 
and south to form the root population of Oman, whilst others may have 
moved northwards, working up the Arabian coast or, some of them, skirting 
it by sea. Eventually the most adventurous of them — and perhaps they were 
also amongst the earliest to undertake this putative 'trek' — reached the 
southern Mesopotamian marshlands and founded Eridu. They were 
unquestionably fisherfolk, wherever they came from, and as such they would 
be primary candidates to know the Gulf islands intimately; Enki, after all, 
was their patron. If they were the progenitors of the later Gulf populations, 
this would explain their attachment to its habitable islands: Umm an-Nar, 
Bahrain, Tarut and Failaka were all important centres of the Dilmun culture 
or its contemporaries. 

These early migrants may have been the ancestors of the Ubaid 
potterymakers. This is not to assert that they were responsible for the Ubaid 
pottery found in east Arabian sites, Qatar, Bahrain and the UAE. This is later 
in time than the period about which we are now speculating. The earlier 
Ubaid pottery has, however, been identified with early levels at Eridu. The 
first wave of migrants may have been followed by others, not all of whom 
perhaps went all the way to Sumer but stayed on the Arabian mainland, 
though, if they did, they seem to have kept some contact with their cousins 
to the north. 

Over the centuries the south-east Arabian lake-dwellers could have fanned 
out over a wide area. 6 There may even have been a corresponding movement 
towards the west which, if it is not wholly fantasy, might account for some of 
the similarities which seem to exist between, for example, the rock art of the 
early inhabitants of Oman and that of the western Arabians, who lived far 
away from the Gulf in the region now called the Hijaz and there energetically 
undertook the decoration of most available rock faces in the area, using 
forms and motifs strikingly similar to those in the south-east quadrant of the 
peninsula. 7 These western Arabians were probably the carriers of many of 
the Asiatic influences which appear in late Predynastic Egypt, in the second 

324 



THE ENIGMA OF DILMUN 

half of the fourth millennium. Even some of the rock art of Egypt seems to 
echo forms to be found in the wadis of Oman. But this is more speculative 
still, and, for the present, must remain so. However, it may be recalled in 
passing that the Egyptians seem to have sustained a memory of an island, in 
the midst of the sea, far away beyond the eastern horizon, the Island on the 
Edge of the World. 8 

The chronology of the Gulf, which is now reasonably secure, raises the 
question of the chronology of other parts of the ancient world. Most ancient 
chronologies are based on the succession of the kings of Egypt; in the third 
millennium this is less sure than in later periods. Indeed, the correspondences 
between Egypt and the Gulf would look a good deal more comprehensible 
if the chronology of Egypt were to be lowered by some 800 years. 

It may well be that one of the most tantalizing omissions from the catalogue 
of Bahrain antiquities, the archives of Dilmun, still survives and will one day 
be recovered, perhaps from the library of a Dilmunite king, the tablets room 
of a great temple or the filing system of a member of the Alik Tilmun: for all 
of these there are precedents in Mesopotamia. In recent years the discovery 
of the huge cache of tablets at Ebla (Tel Mardikh), in northern Syria, which 
reveals an entire literature in a language previously unknown, demonstrates 
the wonders which chance or the archaeologist's skill can still recall. The 
archives of Dilmun must exist somewhere; it is unthinkable that what must 
have been a substantial body of records and, conceivably, literature should 
have been irrevocably lost. The possibility that they may have been written 
on organic materials which would have decayed cannot, of course, be wholly 
rejected. However, given the number of references, official as well as literary 
or liturgical, to Dilmun in Mesopotamian records, it seems unlikely that no 
cache of tablets awaits discovery in Bahrain. 

The discovery of such an archive might conceivably throw light on one of 
the most enigmatic elements in the character of Dilmun-Bahrain in antiquity. 
It is early enough to comprehend the importance of the island in trade and to 
accept it as the centre of an important late third-millennium culture in the 
central Gulf whose influence spread to quite distant lands. What is more 
difficult to understand is why it occupied so very special a place in the 
Sumerian (and later) traditions, why, in particular, it was celebrated as the 
the Holy Land. 9 Its essential holiness is possibly Dilmun's most powerful 
characteristic; it is the first of all sacred lands and its legend endured over 
long ages. Its influence was, as has been seen, profound. It was even more 
important than the shrines of Greece, even of Egypt's holiest place at Abydos, 
where Osiris was reputed to have been buried. 

If we assume that by the time the Sumerian cities established themselves, 
the temple administrators flourished and the scribes of Sumer found time 
from their recording of the numbers of sheep the temple owned to compose 
the marvellous songs and stories which are the glory of Sumer, the people of 
the islands and the Arabians were distinct (or thought themselves to be) 

325 



THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ARABIAN GULF 

from their cousins in the north, their view of the holiness of their land might 
well be impressive to a visiting Sumerian merchant. The merchant, or the 
scribe, or court official or whoever, might thus take back to Sumer the story 
of a distant land lit by a strange and numinous light. 

Well and good. But why did the Dilmunites themselves consider their 
land to be so uniquely, so exceptionally sacred? It cannot have been simple 
chauvinism (my land is holier than your land') or merely the consequence 
of ample supplies of fresh water, pace Enki, in an otherwise desert 
environment. There must be some other, more compelling explanation, but 
thus far it evades us. In this context a connection with astronomical observation 
and navigation, postulated here, may repay consideration. 

The rich and complex designs of the seals will clearly repay further study, 
containing, as they must do, much information waiting to be released. It may 
eventually be possible to 'read' the seals: it certainly should be possible to 
understand the significance of some of their symbolism, particularly of the 
interrelationship of the symbols and the frequency with which some of them 
